



	Questions : Lok Sabha




























Screen Reader Access
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Navigation



Text Size

                                A

                                A
A















हिन्दी मे








Parliament of India Lok Sabha House of the
                        People






* Special Characters not allowed












India Time 


Your Time 


                        Monday,
                        11 April 2022









HomeMembersSitting MembersMembers Home PageMembers' PortalContact DetailsMembers SearchStatistical AnalysisAttendance of MembersHandbook Members Since 1952Digitized Who's WhoOthers BusinessProvisional CalendarList of BusinessPapers to be LaidList of Private Members' BusinessBulletin-IDigitized Lok Sabha Bulletin Part IBulletin-IIStatement of WorkSpecial Mentions (ZERO HOUR)Resume of WorkDigitized Resume of Work done by Lok Sabha QuestionsHomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions DebatesIntroductionSynopsisUncorrected DebateText of DebateDigitized DebatesConstituent Assembly DebatesWit And HumourDebate SearchHindi FontsDisclaimer Papers LaidPapers Laid on the Table of the House LegislationIntroduction(How Bill Becomes Act)Bills IntroducedBills PassedBills PendingBills AssentedBills LapsedBills WithdrawnBills NegativedBills Search Disclaimer CommitteesIntroductionChairpersonSummary of WorkCommittee Meetings ScheduleBills Referred to CommitteesReports PresentedDigitized ReportsPress ReleaseMembership SearchToday's Committee MeetingsCommittee Subject SelectedDepartment Related-RS Govt. AssurancesSANSAD TVIntranet





HomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions











Download as PDF




Print












PDF/WORD(Hindi)


PDF/WORD




                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
                                





                                    MINISTRY OF
                                    SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT






                                    LOK SABHA
                                





UNSTARRED 


                                    QUESTION NO:
                                

1606






                                    ANSWERED ON: 
                                

11.02.2020






Schemes for OBCs




Vijay Baghel













                                                    Arun Sao
                                                












                        Will the Minister of





SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT


                        be pleased to state:-















                                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIAMINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENTLOK SABHAUNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 1606TO BE ANSWERED ON 11.02.2020SCHEMES FOR OBCs 1606. SHRI VIJAY BAGHEL:SHRI ARUN SAO: Will the Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state: (a)  the details of the schemes being implemented by the Government for the welfare of Other Backward Classes (OBCs) at present;(b) whether there is any proposal to start scheme for employment and self-employment of  OBCs; (c)  if so, the details thereof; and (d)  the time by which the said scheme is likely to be started?






ANSWER




                                                        ANSWERMINISTER OF STATE FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT(SHRI KRISHAN PAL GURJAR)(a): The Government is implementing following schemes for welfare of OBCs for their educational empowerment, employment generation and skill development:-1) Pre-Matric Scholarship for OBC students2) Post-Matric Scholarship for OBC students3) Construction of Hostels for OBC Boys and Girls4) Dr. Ambedkar Scheme of Interest Subsidy on Educational Loan for Overseas Studies for OBCs/EBCs  5) National Fellowship for OBCs6) Assistance for Skill Development of OBC/EBC/DNT.7) Venture Capital Fund for OBCs.8) National Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation (NBCFDC) is implementing concessional loan Schemes for OBC/EBC/DNT.The details of schemes are attached at Annexure - I & II.(b)  There is no proposal to start scheme for employment and self-employment of OBCs.  However, NBCFDC facilitates Skill Development Training for the eligible members of Backward Classes through Sector Skill Councils and Government Training Institutes so that eligible Backward Classes people could engage in developmental activities by way of self-employment.  The existing schemes of Corporation are having primary objective for employment and self-employment of OBCs.(c & d) NBCFDC under its Skill Development Training Programme   facilitates upgradation of technical and entrepreneurial skills  through Government Training Institutes (TIs) and Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) constituted by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship on pan India basis so that eligible member of Backward Classes (OBCs)/Economically Backward Classes (EBCs), De-notified Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) etc. may engage in developmental activities by way of self/wage employment. The details of the scheme are Annexed at III.					        *****Annexure-ANational Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation(A Govt.of India Undertaking, Ministry of Social Justice  & Empowerment)General Loan Scheme ObjectivesUnder this scheme, loan assistance is available for various income generating activities such as Agriculture and Allied Activities, Small Business/Artisan & Traditional Occupation, Transport Sector & Service Sector and Technical & Professional Trades/Courses.Eligibilitya)	Members of Backward Classes, as notified by Central Government/State Governments from time to time.b)	Applicant’s annual family income should be less than Rs. 3.00 Lakh.   Salient Features				Maximum loan limit				:	Rs. 15.00 Lakh (per beneficiary)Pattern of Finance(i)	NBCFDC Loan				:	85%(ii)	Channel Partner/Beneficiary Share	:	15%	Rate of Interest						 (i)	Loan upto Rs. 5.00 Lakh			:	6% p.a.(ii)	Loan above Rs.5.00 Lakh upto  		:	7% p.a.Rs. 10.00 Lakh(iii)	Loan above Rs.10.00 Lakh upto 		:	8% p.a.	Rs. 15.00 LakhRepayment PeriodLoan is to be repaid in quarterly instalments with maximum 8 years (including the moratorium period of six months on the recovery of principal).For more information contact Toll Free No.18001023399, Website: www.nbcfdc.gov.in NATIONAL BACKWARD CLASSES FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATIONEDUCATION LOAN SCHEME 1.	OBJECTIVETo extend Education Loan to the students of Backward Classes for pursuing professional/technical education at graduate and higher level and for pursuing vocational Courses.2.	ELIGIBILITYa)	Members of Backward Classes, as notified by Central Government/State Government from time to time.b)	The annual family income of the applicant is fixed as Rs.3.00 Lakh. The Channel Partners (State Channelising Agencies/Banks) are requested to release atleast 50% of total funding to persons with annual family income upto Rs.1.50 Lakh.c)	The applicant should have obtained admission for any professional and technical courses approved by appropriate agency such as AICTE, Medical Council of India, UGC etc. in a duly accredited/recognized institute. Minimum 50% marks in qualifying exami.e the exam whose qualification is a pre-requisite for the course.d) 	Should have secured admission to professional/technical courses in India or abroad through Entrance Test/Merit based selection process.OrThe trainees should have secured admission in a course of duration of atleast period of six months in India and or supported by a Ministry/Deptt./Organization of the Government or a Company/Society/Organization supported by National Skill Development Corporation or State Skill Missions/State Skill Corporations, Sector Skill Council approved courses, preferably leading to a Certificate/ Diploma/Degree etc. issued by a Government Organization or an organization recognized /authorized by the Government to do so including but not limited to Nursing, Phrama, Tourism & Catering, Teachers Training etc.3.	COURSES COVEREDAll professional and technical courses at graduate and higher level approved by appropriate authority and vocational courses as mentioned above.4.	EXPENSES COVEREDAdmission Fee & Tuition Fee; Books; Stationery & other instruments required for the course; examination fee; boarding & lodging expenses; insurance premium for policy during the loan period.5.	QUANTUM OF FINANCE a)	For Professional / Technical only•	90% of the expenditure of the course subject to maximum loan limit of Rs.15.00 Lakh per student (For study in India), the balance will be borne by student/SCA.•	85% of the expenditure of the course subject to maximum of Rs.20.00 Lakh per student (For study in abroad), the balance will be borne by student/SCA. (For Professional / Technical Only)b)	For Vocational CoursesNeed based finance to meet 90% of admissible expenses for the course which may be as ascertained by the Channel Partners based on the prevailing government stipulations, market conditions, level of specialization of course etc., subject to limit prescribed in 5 (a) .6.	RATE OF INTERESTi)	For Boys		:	4%     p.a.ii)	For Girls		:	3.5% p.a.7.	MORATORIUM PERIODThe moratorium period for recoveries from these Channel Partners is hereby uniformly fixed as five years irrespective of the type and duration of the course for which loans are provided.8.	REPAYMENTThe maximum recovery period may be 10 years after the lapse of the moratorium period of 5 years i.e. the loan will require to be repaid to NBCFDC by the Channel Partner within 15 years of the same being disbursed.9.	PRE-PAYMENT OF LOANThe borrower can repay the loan any time after commencement of repayment of loan. No pre-closure charges shall be insisted from beneficiary in case of early repayment of loan.For more information contact Toll Free No.18001023399, Website: www.nbcfdc.gov.in National Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation(A Govt.of India Undertaking, Ministry of Social Justice  & Empowerment)“NEW SWARNIMA SCHEME FOR WOMEN”ObjectivesInculcating the spirit of self-dependence among the women of Backward Classes under Term Loan.Eligibility?	The women belonging to Backward Classes as notified by the Central/ State Governments from time to time shall be eligible for loan under this scheme.?	Applicant’s annual family income should be less than Rs. 3.00 Lakh.   Salient Features ?	The target group of the “New Swarnima” scheme of NBCFDC is the women belonging to Backward Classes having annual family income less than Rs.3.00 Lakh.?	The beneficiary women is not required to invest any amount of her own on the projects upto cost of Rs.2,00,000/-.?	The rate of interest on the amount of loan is less as compared to the general loan scheme of the Corporation.Maximum Loan Amount		    	:     	Rs. 2.00 Lakh (per beneficiary)Pattern of Financing1.	NBCFDC Loan					:	95%	2.	Channel Partner Contribution			:	05%Rate of Interest1.	From NBCFDC to Channel Partner		:	2% p.a.2.	From Channel Partner to beneficiary	:        5% p.a.RepaymentLoan is to be repaid in quarterly instalments with maximum 8 years (including the moratorium period of six months on the recovery of principal).For more information contact Toll Free No.18001023399, Website: www.nbcfdc.gov.in National Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation(A Govt.of India Undertaking, Ministry of Social Justice  & Empowerment)MICRO FINANCE SCHEMEObjectivesIn order to cater to the Micro Finance needs of small entrepreneurs belonging to the target group, the Corporation has introduced a scheme for Micro Financing through nominated Channel Partners (State Channelising Agencies/Banks).   It is desirable to disburse loans through Self-Help Groups (SHGs) by Channel Partners under Micro Finance Scheme.Self-Help Groups (SHGs)SHGs is a small economically homogenous and affinity group of poor people voluntarily formed to save and mutually agree  to contribute to a common fund to be lent to its members as per group decision.Channel Partners may also play a vital role through their field officers, encouraging people of the target group in forming Self-Help Groups and get financial assistance under Micro Finance Scheme of NBCFDC.Eligibility •	Members of Backward Classes as notified by Central/State Govt. from time to time.•	Applicant’s annual family income should be less than Rs. 3.00 Lakh.   . •	In a SHG 60% of members should be from Backward Classes and remaining 40% members may be from other weaker section like SC/Handicapped/Minorities etc.Salient Features 1.	Maximum loan limit per SHG			:	Rs.15.00 Lakh2.	Maximum loan limit per beneficiary			:	Rs. 1,00,000/-3.	Maximum number of persons in one SHG		:	20ImplementationThe scheme is to be implemented by Channel Partners in rural and urban areas by way of financing the beneficiaries either directly or through Self-Help Groups (SHGs) preferably in the areas remained uncovered so far under any of such scheme.Pattern of Financing 1.	NBCFDC Loan						:	90%2.	Channel Partner/ Beneficiary contribution		:	10%Rate of Interest1.	From NBCFDC to Channel Partner			:	2% p.a.2.	From Channel Partner to SHG/Beneficiary 		:    	5% p.a.RepaymentLoan is to be repaid in quarterly instalments within 4 Years (including the moratorium period of six months on the recovery of principal).For more information contact Toll Free No.18001023399, Website: www.nbcfdc.gov.in  National Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation(A Govt.of India Undertaking, Ministry of Social Justice  & Empowerment)MAHILA SAMRIDDHI YOJANA (Micro Finance Scheme for women)ObjectivesTo provide Micro Finance to women entrepreneurs belonging to the target group.Eligibility a)	Women belonging to Backward Classes, as notified by Central Government/State Governments from time to time.b)	Applicant’s annual family income should be less than Rs. 3.00 Lakh.   c)	In a SHG 60% of members should be from Backward Classes and remaining 40% members may be from other weaker section like SC/Handicapped/Minorities etc.Salient Features 1.	Maximum loan limit per SHG			:		Rs.15.00 Lakh	2.	Maximum loan limit per beneficiary 		:		Rs.1,00,000/-3.	Maximum number of women in one SHG	:		20ImplementationThe scheme is to be implemented by Channel Partners in rural and urban areas by way of financing the women beneficiaries either directly or through Self-Help Groups (SHGs).Pattern of Finance1.	NBCFDC loan					:		95%2.	Channel Partner/Beneficiary contribution	:		05%Rate of Interest1.	From NBCFDC to Channel Partner		:		1% p.a.2.	From Channel Partner to SHG/Beneficiary 	:		4% p.a.RepaymentLoan is to be repaid in quarterly instalments within 4 Years (including the moratorium period of six months on the recovery of principal).For more information contact Toll Free No.18001023399, Website: www.nbcfdc.gov.in National Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation(A Govt.of India Undertaking, Ministry of Social Justice  & Empowerment)SMALL LOAN SCHEMEObjectivesThe Corporation has introduced Small Loan Scheme for the individual for starting small business.   The scheme is implemented through Channel Partners (State Channelising Agencies/Banks).Eligibility •	Members of Backward Classes, as notified by Central Government/State Governments from time to time.•	Applicant’s annual family income should be less than Rs. 3.00 Lakh.   Salient Features Maximum loan limit				:	Rs.1,00,000/- (per beneficiary)Pattern of Finance1.	NBCFDC Loan					:	85% 2.	Channel Partner/Beneficiary contribution	:	15%Rate of Interest1.	From NBCFDC to Channel Partner	:	3% p.a. 2.	From Channel Partner to Beneficiary	:	6% p.a. Repayment Period				:	8 years	For more information contact Toll Free No.18001023399, Website: www.nbcfdc.gov.in  National Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation(A Govt.of India Undertaking, Ministry of Social Justice  & Empowerment)NBCFDC LENDING POLICY FOR NBFC-MFIsOBJECTIVES  :  The broad objective of NBCFDC is to provide financial assistance for the economic empowerment of persons belonging to the Backward Class families having income less than Rs. 3.00 lakh per annum. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR NBFC-MFI  :  NBFC-MFI fulfilling the following norms shall be considered eligible to avail financial assistance from NBCFDC: a)	The NBFC-MFI should be registered with the RBI as Non-Banking Financial Company-Micro Finance Institution (NBFC-MFI).b)	The NBFC-MFI should be following all RBI norms related to Micro Finance.c)	The NBFC-MFI should have 3 years of continuous profit track record.  d)	The NBFC-MFI should have Gross Non-Performing Assets (NPA) less than 2% and net NPA below 0.5% as per their Annual Accounts at the end of the preceding financial year.e)	The NBFC-MFI should be a member of a Credit Bureau.f)	The NBFC-MFI should have minimum Capacity Assessment Rating of mfr5 by CRISIL or its equivalent.g)	The NBFC-MFI should not have defaulted in repayment of outside borrowings in the last three years or undergone a corporate debt re-structuring.h)	The NBFC-MFI should have proper system for internal accounting, risk management, internal audit, MIS, cash management, etc. and its annual accounts should have been audited in the last three years.i)	 It will be desirable for the NBFC-MFI to have undergone Code of Conduct Assessment (COCA) with a minimum score of 60 or equivalent.Further with a view to promoting Startups in consonance with Government of India focus new MFIs may also be considered subject to their complying  to above criteria except sub clause (c) and after due diligence/assessment by reputed certification agencies.    However, the extent of funding to such Startup will be limited to recommendation of the certification body.NBCFDC recognizes Self Help Groups (SHGs) in which predominantly (60% and above) members belong to Backward Class provided other members belong to weaker sections (as per income or economic criteria prescribed by Govt.) including but not limited to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Minorities and Person with Disabilities (PwD).QUANTUM OF ASSISTANCE :  NBCFDC provides loans upto 90% of the Project Cost for units costing upto Rs.1,00,000/- per beneficiary member. The balance 10% share shall be contributed by the NBFC-MFIs and/or beneficiaries. Maximum Loan limit per SHG is Rs. 15.00 lakh.INTEREST RATE   :  The pattern of charging interest under the scheme shall be as follows: NBCFDC to NBFC-MFI	Interest Spread to NBFC-MFI	NBFC-MFI to Beneficiaries4% p.a. 	8% p.a.	12% p.a. REPAYMENT PERIOD   :	The loan amount shall be repaid in quarterly installments within a maximum period of four years from the date of each disbursement including the moratorium period of six months.   There shall not be any moratorium period for payment of interest.FUNDS UTILISATION(i)	NBFC-MFI shall utilize funds within 120 days from the date of release of funds by NBCFDC. The NBFC-MFI shall send Quarterly Progress Report (QPR) on the utilization of the NBCFDC funds as per the prescribed format.  (ii)	NBCFDC funds actually disbursed by the NBFC-MFI to the beneficiaries under the approved sector shall only be considered as funds utilized.Annexure-BNational Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation SKILL DEVELOPMENT TRAINING SCHEME OF NBCFDC1.	OBJECTIVESTo facilitate Skill Development Training in broad conformance to the Common Norms for upgradation of technical and entrepreneurial skills through Govt.  Training Institutes/organizations, Sector Skill Councils constituted by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and such reputed Training Institutes affiliated to National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Council (SSCs) and have entered into MOU with NBCFDC, so that eligible members of target group may engage in developmental activities by way of self-employment or wage employment.2.	ELIGIBILITY Training may be provided to the target group of NBCFDC who are specifically categorized and certified as under:a.	Beneficiaries should belong to either a caste categorized as OBC under State and/or Central Govt. list with annual family income below Rs. 3.00 Lakh or communities categorized as De-Notified, Semi-Nomadic & Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) or to category of Economically Backward Classes (EBCs) or be Sr. Citizens or Transgender or Member of Beggars’ Community or Victim of Substance Abuse .b.	In case of OBC, the caste categorization under OBC may be confirmed to be appearing in Centre list at website www.ncbc.gov.in or the designated State Govt. list. Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.3.00 Lakhs.c.	In case of EBCs, there will be no caste certificate required, however, Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.1.00 Lakh.d.	For compliance of annual family income as defined at b) and c) above, the Annual Family income certificate issued by the appropriate authority of the State Government or self-certified and duly endorsed by a Gazetted officer as defined by the appropriate government will be acceptable. It is explicitly clarified that endorsement by public representatives, Gram Pradhan, Sarpanch, Councilor, notaries etc. will not be acceptable.  Further, valid Below Poverty Line (BPL) card and Antodaya Anna Yojna (AAY) cards will also be acceptable as commensurate proof of annual family income of the beneficiary being within Rs. 1.00 Lakh per annum.e.	In case of DNT Community, given their extremely deprived & migratory nature, exemption has been given for insistence of caste certificate, income certificate, proof of age and permanent address. In absence of this, the training providers can take undertaking in the form of self-declaration of the candidate of his/her specific caste, date of birth and address alongwith the endorsement by the local Pradhan of the Community/Cluster to this effect. It would require to be, however, confirmed by the training provider that the caste of the candidate comes under the DNT category as defined in the Annexure-VII of the DNT Commission Report. There will be no income criteria for DNTs.f.	In case of Senior Citizen, the age of person should be 60 years or above. Age should be authenticated through valid proof viz. certificate of educational qualification, Adhaar Card, Pan Card, Driving License etc. There will be no caste or income criteria for            Sr. Citizens. g.	In case of transgender, exemption has been given for caste category and income limit. The member of transgender community needs to obtain certificate of identity issued by District Magistrate based on recommendation of a District Screening Committee, which will comprise the Chief Medical Officer, District Social Welfare Officer, Psychologist or psychiatrist and a representative of transgender community. h.	In case of Beggars, the person as defined in The Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959 should be:i.	Soliciting or receiving alms, in a public place whether or not under any pretence such as singing, dancing, fortune telling, performing tricks or offering any article for sale; ii.	entering any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; iii.	exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound injury, deformity or disease whether of a human being or of an animal; iv.	having no visible means of subsistence and wandering about or remaining in any public place in such condition or manner, as makes it likely that the person doing so exists by soliciting or receiving alms;v.	allowing oneself to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving almsi.	In case of victims of substance abuse, any certificate issued by treatment clinic, Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCA) may be accepted.j.	Minimum age should be 18 Years at the time of assessment/certification except for Sr. Citizens.k.	In the case of migrant population, Income & Caste Certificates issued by their State of original domicile will be acceptable.Note: Eligibility criteria will be broadly as stipulated vide relevant Govt. guidelines directives issued/communicated from time to time 3.	AGE The training are to be normally imparted to persons of target group who are of 18 Years and above on date of completion of assessment/certification. However, in special case such as hereditary artisanal trades, training may be imparted to beneficiaries less than 18 years of age subject to the limits defined in the respective Qualification packs and based on justification of the SSC/TI.4.	DURATION OF TRAINING 	As per common norms issued by MSDE from time to time. i)	Fresh:  Minimum 200 Hrs. and/or as per National Occupation Standard (NOS)ii)	Skill Up-gradation (including Reskilling, RPL) : 32-80 Hrs.5.	COURSEAll skill development courses offered under the scheme must broadly conform to the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF). 6.	AMOUNT OF GRANT-IN-AID i)	100% of the total training cost or course fee of the training programme will be provided by NBCFDC. ii)	Stipend – Beneficiaries of skill training programme of NBCFDC are from socio-economic disadvantaged sections of the society comprise a special group. Accordingly, to cover the aspect of Boarding & lodging, travel costs as also other benefits for special area groups, the stipend amount @ Rs. 1000/- per month per trainee will be admissible for Fresh Courses subject to availability of funds with NBCFDC. Non- residential trainees having 80% and above attendance during the training programme will be eligible for stipend as a reimbursement for the to and fro travel from the training centre. The stipend will be disbursed through DBT by the SSCs/Training Institutes to the eligible trainees at the end of training programme in terms of clause 5.2 of Schedule I of Common Norms.For reskilling & RPL payment to candidate will be as incorporated in MSDE norms.No stipend will be admissible in case of Residential Programmes. 7.	ELIGIBILITY OF TRAINING INSTITUTE:-7.1	The Skill Development will be got carried out through following categories of institutes, councils and training partners following the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) and complying to the Common Normsa)	The Institute under the aegis of Central Government & State Government.		b)	Sector Skill Councils – who sign MOAs with NBCFDC c)	Credible Training Partners, having good past track record, registered with National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) especially in areas of skilling including where the concerned SSCs do not have working relations with NBCFDC or are not found to be proactive.7.2	To help fulfill the mandate of Corporation of promoting self-employment and sustainable livelihood of OBCs, training may also be got conducted by State Channelizing Agencies especially in disturbance prone areas such as J&K, North East etc. and Training Institute of Channel Partner Banks.7.3	The award of training to above categories of institutes/councils/training partners will be made based on proposals received from them which will normally be by way of request for proposals issued by the Corporation.8.	COMMENCEMENT OF TRAINING PROGRAMME:  8.1	The training institute/SSCs will initially submit list of eligible mobilized candidates for proposed training programme along with original minutes of the meeting of selection committee, mode of publicity and demand of funds. 8.2	The Training Institutes/SSCs need to accept the terms & conditions of Letter of Intent (LOI) issued by NBCFDC.  The receipt of Letter of Intent signed by Training Providers will construe as the sanction which will be valid for ongoing financial year only. 8.3	The programme should commence within one month from date of release of first instalment of sanctioned amount which will be released proportionately for the numbers of selected trainees.9	BASE COSTSSkill Development training costs under NBCFDC scheme will be paid at the rates as given in SCHEDULE-I of Common Norms as issued by MSDE in respect of each trainee who successfully completes the training and is assessed and certified by third party as per govt. guidelines10.	RELEASE OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE The sanctioned amount of Training Cost will be released in two installments of 50% each. Additionally the stipend amount paid to the beneficiaries as also a part of the assessment charges, also be reimbursed.10.1	First Installment of 50% of the sanctioned amount will be released proportionately (as part of 30% advance payment as stipulated in the Common Norms and to additionally cover the expenses for payment of stipend and/or accommodation charges etc. in case of residential training) on receipt of the following documents:(i)	list of trainees alongwith acceptance of sanction letter and terms & conditions for the same as appended (signature & Stamp of authorized signatory should be put on each page)(ii)	Original Minutes of Selection Committee meeting duly signed & stamped by its members following point no. iv of General Terms & Conditions.(iii)	Demand for release as per list submitted in Annexure I.(iv)	Mode of Publicity/Copies of Advertisements with details of Newspapers with Dates.(v)	Undertaking (Annexure-II)(vi)	List of Training Institutes/Partners for each location with Skype ID/Mobile No. and details of contact person and complete postal address be given alongwith center-wise/districtwise list of trainees.10.2	Second Installment of 50%  of sanctioned amount and stipend amount, if applicable, will be released on receipt of following:i.	List of successful trainees along with complete details of each trainee with certified attendance sheets (bio-metric) for each Centre.ii.	Annexure III to IV duly filled in all respects (Attached) iii.	Utilization Certificate on GFR 12-A (for the Ist installment) alonwith statement of Expenditure Annexure -V duly certified by Head of Institute & Chartered Accountant. (Attached)iv.	Details of disbursement of stipend through DBT, if any, duly certified by authorized signatory.(format attached)v.	Photographs of each training programme of the candidates (in group) and in working posture.vi.	Analytical Statement of feedback forms.vii.	a)  Proof of placement of minimum 70% of the candidates in wage/self -employment alongwith details of their wages per month and contact details with address of companies where they are placed and be uploaded on the website of the Training Institute.b)	In case of re-skilling, the clause 4.2 of Common Norms be adhered to.viii.	In case of self-employment, the Training Institute/Sector Skill Council should provide the details of mode of self-employment through NBCFDC loans/Self Finance/Bank loans etc., if any.ix.	Registration of Job Portal and Entry of Trainees Dataa)	Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils have to register on the Job Portal b)	The User IDs and Passwords entered will be approved by NBCFDCc)	Trainees details will be entered by Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils on the Portal10.3	Payment & Reimbursement of Stipend to Beneficiaries	Stipend amount for fresh training courses as mentioned in Letter of Intent will be released on submission of proof of transfer of stipend to the eligible candidates (having 80% attendance) through digital means. 11.	REFUND/ADJUSTMENTS i)	In case of no. of trainees successfully completing the training is lesser than the no. of trainees for which sanction was accorded and funds released, then the amount proportionate in respect of such lesser number would be adjusted in the release of final installment.ii)	NBCFDC reserves the right to withhold the payment of the balance amount and wherever deemed appropriate and demand refund of the first installment with Bank interest, if the SSCs/Training Institute  found to have misled NBCFDC by submitting incorrect information or deliberately suppressing relevant information. NBCFDC may consider to blacklist such Training Providers and inform the funding agencies of Central Govt. / State Govt.12.	INSPECTION Representative of NBCFDC shall have the right to inspect the account books, records of SSCs and interaction with the trainees as well as with the trainer and officials  of Training  Institute/SSCs/TPs.  NBCFDC may also interact telephonically or Skype/Video Conferencing with the trainees before, during and after the training to assess the quality and status of the training programme/trainees.13.	SUPPORT FOR BOARDING & LODGING/TRANSPORT Will be available as per need within Common Norms subject to availability of funds. 14.	THIRD PARTY CERTIFICATION & ASSESSMENT  14.1. To ensure independent and unbiased assessment and certification of trained candidates, the Training Institute will be required to arrange for assessment and certification as per Govt. guidelines. Accordingly the NBCFDC funds will be released for the successful trainees only. 14.2. Assessment charges will be shared, subject to availability of funds, only if the Training programme under NBCFDC scheme is completed within 8 months of sanction of training programmes during financial year. NBCFDC will bear the cost of assessment charges of the training conducted as per the details below:i.	For Fresh training		- 	Rs. 600/- per trainees (maximum)ii.	For Reskilling 		-	Rs. 400/- per trainee (maximum)The above will be applicable only for one-time assessment. Reassessment charges if incurred by SSC/ TI will not be reimbursed by NBCFDC.   14.3. The assessment charges will be released on submission of the following documents:i.	Bill from SSC/TIsii.	Bill submitted by Assessment Agency to SSC/TI along with original assessment reportiii.	Proof of transfer of assessment charges in the account of Assessment agencyiv.	Copy of assignment of work to Assessment Agencyv.	Proof of affiliation of Assessment Agency with SSC/TI. 15. 	PROCEDURE FOR SELECTION OF TRAINEES BY TRAINING PROVIDERS Selection Committee for selection of eligible candidates will be formed at local and comprising of a)	representative of State Channelizing Agency/RRB/Nationalized Bankb)	representative of Social Welfare Dept./Collector Office/Govt. officials from Distt. Administrations.c)	representatives from concerned Industry d)	representative from training institute/SSC/Training Partnere)	representative of NBCFDC*Atleast 3 members from above should be present in the meeting of selection committeeTransparent system of selection of trainees need to be adopted by the Training Providers. 		Preference be given to female applicants of target group.  16.	MONITORING & TRACKING The NBCFDC shall have access to an open, common and extensive data of SSCs/TIs to ensure NBCFDC IT systems can import data for its job portal. The training institutes will track the trainees as per Govt. guidelines from the date of completion/certification of training with respect to their career progression, retention and other parameters.  17. AUTOMATIC VALIDATION OF GOVERNMENT GUIDELINES As NBCFDC is receiving a major part of its grant from Government of India for undertaking skill development activities, this scheme will require to be read along with any guidelines/directives received with regards to the skilling programme from the administrative department/ministry********* Annexure-BNational Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation SKILL DEVELOPMENT TRAINING SCHEME OF NBCFDC1.	OBJECTIVESTo facilitate Skill Development Training in broad conformance to the Common Norms for upgradation of technical and entrepreneurial skills through Govt.  Training Institutes/organizations, Sector Skill Councils constituted by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and such reputed Training Institutes affiliated to National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Council (SSCs) and have entered into MOU with NBCFDC, so that eligible members of target group may engage in developmental activities by way of self-employment or wage employment.2.	ELIGIBILITY Training may be provided to the target group of NBCFDC who are specifically categorized and certified as under:a.	Beneficiaries should belong to either a caste categorized as OBC under State and/or Central Govt. list with annual family income below Rs. 3.00 Lakh or communities categorized as De-Notified, Semi-Nomadic & Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) or to category of Economically Backward Classes (EBCs) or be Sr. Citizens or Transgender or Member of Beggars’ Community or Victim of Substance Abuse .b.	In case of OBC, the caste categorization under OBC may be confirmed to be appearing in Centre list at website www.ncbc.gov.in or the designated State Govt. list. Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.3.00 Lakhs.c.	In case of EBCs, there will be no caste certificate required, however, Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.1.00 Lakh.d.	For compliance of annual family income as defined at b) and c) above, the Annual Family income certificate issued by the appropriate authority of the State Government or self-certified and duly endorsed by a Gazetted officer as defined by the appropriate government will be acceptable. It is explicitly clarified that endorsement by public representatives, Gram Pradhan, Sarpanch, Councilor, notaries etc. will not be acceptable.  Further, valid Below Poverty Line (BPL) card and Antodaya Anna Yojna (AAY) cards will also be acceptable as commensurate proof of annual family income of the beneficiary being within Rs. 1.00 Lakh per annum.e.	In case of DNT Community, given their extremely deprived & migratory nature, exemption has been given for insistence of caste certificate, income certificate, proof of age and permanent address. In absence of this, the training providers can take undertaking in the form of self-declaration of the candidate of his/her specific caste, date of birth and address alongwith the endorsement by the local Pradhan of the Community/Cluster to this effect. It would require to be, however, confirmed by the training provider that the caste of the candidate comes under the DNT category as defined in the Annexure-VII of the DNT Commission Report. There will be no income criteria for DNTs.f.	In case of Senior Citizen, the age of person should be 60 years or above. Age should be authenticated through valid proof viz. certificate of educational qualification, Adhaar Card, Pan Card, Driving License etc. There will be no caste or income criteria for            Sr. Citizens. g.	In case of transgender, exemption has been given for caste category and income limit. The member of transgender community needs to obtain certificate of identity issued by District Magistrate based on recommendation of a District Screening Committee, which will comprise the Chief Medical Officer, District Social Welfare Officer, Psychologist or psychiatrist and a representative of transgender community. h.	In case of Beggars, the person as defined in The Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959 should be:i.	Soliciting or receiving alms, in a public place whether or not under any pretence such as singing, dancing, fortune telling, performing tricks or offering any article for sale; ii.	entering any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; iii.	exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound injury, deformity or disease whether of a human being or of an animal; iv.	having no visible means of subsistence and wandering about or remaining in any public place in such condition or manner, as makes it likely that the person doing so exists by soliciting or receiving alms;v.	allowing oneself to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving almsi.	In case of victims of substance abuse, any certificate issued by treatment clinic, Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCA) may be accepted.j.	Minimum age should be 18 Years at the time of assessment/certification except for Sr. Citizens.k.	In the case of migrant population, Income & Caste Certificates issued by their State of original domicile will be acceptable.Note: Eligibility criteria will be broadly as stipulated vide relevant Govt. guidelines directives issued/communicated from time to time 3.	AGE The training are to be normally imparted to persons of target group who are of 18 Years and above on date of completion of assessment/certification. However, in special case such as hereditary artisanal trades, training may be imparted to beneficiaries less than 18 years of age subject to the limits defined in the respective Qualification packs and based on justification of the SSC/TI.4.	DURATION OF TRAINING 	As per common norms issued by MSDE from time to time. i)	Fresh:  Minimum 200 Hrs. and/or as per National Occupation Standard (NOS)ii)	Skill Up-gradation (including Reskilling, RPL) : 32-80 Hrs.5.	COURSEAll skill development courses offered under the scheme must broadly conform to the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF). 6.	AMOUNT OF GRANT-IN-AID i)	100% of the total training cost or course fee of the training programme will be provided by NBCFDC. ii)	Stipend – Beneficiaries of skill training programme of NBCFDC are from socio-economic disadvantaged sections of the society comprise a special group. Accordingly, to cover the aspect of Boarding & lodging, travel costs as also other benefits for special area groups, the stipend amount @ Rs. 1000/- per month per trainee will be admissible for Fresh Courses subject to availability of funds with NBCFDC. Non- residential trainees having 80% and above attendance during the training programme will be eligible for stipend as a reimbursement for the to and fro travel from the training centre. The stipend will be disbursed through DBT by the SSCs/Training Institutes to the eligible trainees at the end of training programme in terms of clause 5.2 of Schedule I of Common Norms.For reskilling & RPL payment to candidate will be as incorporated in MSDE norms.No stipend will be admissible in case of Residential Programmes. 7.	ELIGIBILITY OF TRAINING INSTITUTE:-7.1	The Skill Development will be got carried out through following categories of institutes, councils and training partners following the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) and complying to the Common Normsa)	The Institute under the aegis of Central Government & State Government.		b)	Sector Skill Councils – who sign MOAs with NBCFDC c)	Credible Training Partners, having good past track record, registered with National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) especially in areas of skilling including where the concerned SSCs do not have working relations with NBCFDC or are not found to be proactive.7.2	To help fulfill the mandate of Corporation of promoting self-employment and sustainable livelihood of OBCs, training may also be got conducted by State Channelizing Agencies especially in disturbance prone areas such as J&K, North East etc. and Training Institute of Channel Partner Banks.7.3	The award of training to above categories of institutes/councils/training partners will be made based on proposals received from them which will normally be by way of request for proposals issued by the Corporation.8.	COMMENCEMENT OF TRAINING PROGRAMME:  8.1	The training institute/SSCs will initially submit list of eligible mobilized candidates for proposed training programme along with original minutes of the meeting of selection committee, mode of publicity and demand of funds. 8.2	The Training Institutes/SSCs need to accept the terms & conditions of Letter of Intent (LOI) issued by NBCFDC.  The receipt of Letter of Intent signed by Training Providers will construe as the sanction which will be valid for ongoing financial year only. 8.3	The programme should commence within one month from date of release of first instalment of sanctioned amount which will be released proportionately for the numbers of selected trainees.9	BASE COSTSSkill Development training costs under NBCFDC scheme will be paid at the rates as given in SCHEDULE-I of Common Norms as issued by MSDE in respect of each trainee who successfully completes the training and is assessed and certified by third party as per govt. guidelines10.	RELEASE OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE The sanctioned amount of Training Cost will be released in two installments of 50% each. Additionally the stipend amount paid to the beneficiaries as also a part of the assessment charges, also be reimbursed.10.1	First Installment of 50% of the sanctioned amount will be released proportionately (as part of 30% advance payment as stipulated in the Common Norms and to additionally cover the expenses for payment of stipend and/or accommodation charges etc. in case of residential training) on receipt of the following documents:(i)	list of trainees alongwith acceptance of sanction letter and terms & conditions for the same as appended (signature & Stamp of authorized signatory should be put on each page)(ii)	Original Minutes of Selection Committee meeting duly signed & stamped by its members following point no. iv of General Terms & Conditions.(iii)	Demand for release as per list submitted in Annexure I.(iv)	Mode of Publicity/Copies of Advertisements with details of Newspapers with Dates.(v)	Undertaking (Annexure-II)(vi)	List of Training Institutes/Partners for each location with Skype ID/Mobile No. and details of contact person and complete postal address be given alongwith center-wise/districtwise list of trainees.10.2	Second Installment of 50%  of sanctioned amount and stipend amount, if applicable, will be released on receipt of following:i.	List of successful trainees along with complete details of each trainee with certified attendance sheets (bio-metric) for each Centre.ii.	Annexure III to IV duly filled in all respects (Attached) iii.	Utilization Certificate on GFR 12-A (for the Ist installment) alonwith statement of Expenditure Annexure -V duly certified by Head of Institute & Chartered Accountant. (Attached)iv.	Details of disbursement of stipend through DBT, if any, duly certified by authorized signatory.(format attached)v.	Photographs of each training programme of the candidates (in group) and in working posture.vi.	Analytical Statement of feedback forms.vii.	a)  Proof of placement of minimum 70% of the candidates in wage/self -employment alongwith details of their wages per month and contact details with address of companies where they are placed and be uploaded on the website of the Training Institute.b)	In case of re-skilling, the clause 4.2 of Common Norms be adhered to.viii.	In case of self-employment, the Training Institute/Sector Skill Council should provide the details of mode of self-employment through NBCFDC loans/Self Finance/Bank loans etc., if any.ix.	Registration of Job Portal and Entry of Trainees Dataa)	Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils have to register on the Job Portal b)	The User IDs and Passwords entered will be approved by NBCFDCc)	Trainees details will be entered by Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils on the Portal10.3	Payment & Reimbursement of Stipend to Beneficiaries	Stipend amount for fresh training courses as mentioned in Letter of Intent will be released on submission of proof of transfer of stipend to the eligible candidates (having 80% attendance) through digital means. 11.	REFUND/ADJUSTMENTS i)	In case of no. of trainees successfully completing the training is lesser than the no. of trainees for which sanction was accorded and funds released, then the amount proportionate in respect of such lesser number would be adjusted in the release of final installment.ii)	NBCFDC reserves the right to withhold the payment of the balance amount and wherever deemed appropriate and demand refund of the first installment with Bank interest, if the SSCs/Training Institute  found to have misled NBCFDC by submitting incorrect information or deliberately suppressing relevant information. NBCFDC may consider to blacklist such Training Providers and inform the funding agencies of Central Govt. / State Govt.12.	INSPECTION Representative of NBCFDC shall have the right to inspect the account books, records of SSCs and interaction with the trainees as well as with the trainer and officials  of Training  Institute/SSCs/TPs.  NBCFDC may also interact telephonically or Skype/Video Conferencing with the trainees before, during and after the training to assess the quality and status of the training programme/trainees.13.	SUPPORT FOR BOARDING & LODGING/TRANSPORT Will be available as per need within Common Norms subject to availability of funds. 14.	THIRD PARTY CERTIFICATION & ASSESSMENT  14.1. To ensure independent and unbiased assessment and certification of trained candidates, the Training Institute will be required to arrange for assessment and certification as per Govt. guidelines. Accordingly the NBCFDC funds will be released for the successful trainees only. 14.2. Assessment charges will be shared, subject to availability of funds, only if the Training programme under NBCFDC scheme is completed within 8 months of sanction of training programmes during financial year. NBCFDC will bear the cost of assessment charges of the training conducted as per the details below:i.	For Fresh training		- 	Rs. 600/- per trainees (maximum)ii.	For Reskilling 		-	Rs. 400/- per trainee (maximum)The above will be applicable only for one-time assessment. Reassessment charges if incurred by SSC/ TI will not be reimbursed by NBCFDC.   14.3. The assessment charges will be released on submission of the following documents:i.	Bill from SSC/TIsii.	Bill submitted by Assessment Agency to SSC/TI along with original assessment reportiii.	Proof of transfer of assessment charges in the account of Assessment agencyiv.	Copy of assignment of work to Assessment Agencyv.	Proof of affiliation of Assessment Agency with SSC/TI. 15. 	PROCEDURE FOR SELECTION OF TRAINEES BY TRAINING PROVIDERS Selection Committee for selection of eligible candidates will be formed at local and comprising of a)	representative of State Channelizing Agency/RRB/Nationalized Bankb)	representative of Social Welfare Dept./Collector Office/Govt. officials from Distt. Administrations.c)	representatives from concerned Industry d)	representative from training institute/SSC/Training Partnere)	representative of NBCFDC*Atleast 3 members from above should be present in the meeting of selection committeeTransparent system of selection of trainees need to be adopted by the Training Providers. 		Preference be given to female applicants of target group.  16.	MONITORING & TRACKING The NBCFDC shall have access to an open, common and extensive data of SSCs/TIs to ensure NBCFDC IT systems can import data for its job portal. The training institutes will track the trainees as per Govt. guidelines from the date of completion/certification of training with respect to their career progression, retention and other parameters.  17. AUTOMATIC VALIDATION OF GOVERNMENT GUIDELINES As NBCFDC is receiving a major part of its grant from Government of India for undertaking skill development activities, this scheme will require to be read along with any guidelines/directives received with regards to the skilling programme from the administrative department/ministry********* Annexure-BNational Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation SKILL DEVELOPMENT TRAINING SCHEME OF NBCFDC1.	OBJECTIVESTo facilitate Skill Development Training in broad conformance to the Common Norms for upgradation of technical and entrepreneurial skills through Govt.  Training Institutes/organizations, Sector Skill Councils constituted by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and such reputed Training Institutes affiliated to National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Council (SSCs) and have entered into MOU with NBCFDC, so that eligible members of target group may engage in developmental activities by way of self-employment or wage employment.2.	ELIGIBILITY Training may be provided to the target group of NBCFDC who are specifically categorized and certified as under:a.	Beneficiaries should belong to either a caste categorized as OBC under State and/or Central Govt. list with annual family income below Rs. 3.00 Lakh or communities categorized as De-Notified, Semi-Nomadic & Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) or to category of Economically Backward Classes (EBCs) or be Sr. Citizens or Transgender or Member of Beggars’ Community or Victim of Substance Abuse .b.	In case of OBC, the caste categorization under OBC may be confirmed to be appearing in Centre list at website www.ncbc.gov.in or the designated State Govt. list. Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.3.00 Lakhs.c.	In case of EBCs, there will be no caste certificate required, however, Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.1.00 Lakh.d.	For compliance of annual family income as defined at b) and c) above, the Annual Family income certificate issued by the appropriate authority of the State Government or self-certified and duly endorsed by a Gazetted officer as defined by the appropriate government will be acceptable. It is explicitly clarified that endorsement by public representatives, Gram Pradhan, Sarpanch, Councilor, notaries etc. will not be acceptable.  Further, valid Below Poverty Line (BPL) card and Antodaya Anna Yojna (AAY) cards will also be acceptable as commensurate proof of annual family income of the beneficiary being within Rs. 1.00 Lakh per annum.e.	In case of DNT Community, given their extremely deprived & migratory nature, exemption has been given for insistence of caste certificate, income certificate, proof of age and permanent address. In absence of this, the training providers can take undertaking in the form of self-declaration of the candidate of his/her specific caste, date of birth and address alongwith the endorsement by the local Pradhan of the Community/Cluster to this effect. It would require to be, however, confirmed by the training provider that the caste of the candidate comes under the DNT category as defined in the Annexure-VII of the DNT Commission Report. There will be no income criteria for DNTs.f.	In case of Senior Citizen, the age of person should be 60 years or above. Age should be authenticated through valid proof viz. certificate of educational qualification, Adhaar Card, Pan Card, Driving License etc. There will be no caste or income criteria for            Sr. Citizens. g.	In case of transgender, exemption has been given for caste category and income limit. The member of transgender community needs to obtain certificate of identity issued by District Magistrate based on recommendation of a District Screening Committee, which will comprise the Chief Medical Officer, District Social Welfare Officer, Psychologist or psychiatrist and a representative of transgender community. h.	In case of Beggars, the person as defined in The Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959 should be:i.	Soliciting or receiving alms, in a public place whether or not under any pretence such as singing, dancing, fortune telling, performing tricks or offering any article for sale; ii.	entering any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; iii.	exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound injury, deformity or disease whether of a human being or of an animal; iv.	having no visible means of subsistence and wandering about or remaining in any public place in such condition or manner, as makes it likely that the person doing so exists by soliciting or receiving alms;v.	allowing oneself to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving almsi.	In case of victims of substance abuse, any certificate issued by treatment clinic, Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCA) may be accepted.j.	Minimum age should be 18 Years at the time of assessment/certification except for Sr. Citizens.k.	In the case of migrant population, Income & Caste Certificates issued by their State of original domicile will be acceptable.Note: Eligibility criteria will be broadly as stipulated vide relevant Govt. guidelines directives issued/communicated from time to time 3.	AGE The training are to be normally imparted to persons of target group who are of 18 Years and above on date of completion of assessment/certification. However, in special case such as hereditary artisanal trades, training may be imparted to beneficiaries less than 18 years of age subject to the limits defined in the respective Qualification packs and based on justification of the SSC/TI.4.	DURATION OF TRAINING 	As per common norms issued by MSDE from time to time. i)	Fresh:  Minimum 200 Hrs. and/or as per National Occupation Standard (NOS)ii)	Skill Up-gradation (including Reskilling, RPL) : 32-80 Hrs.5.	COURSEAll skill development courses offered under the scheme must broadly conform to the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF). 6.	AMOUNT OF GRANT-IN-AID i)	100% of the total training cost or course fee of the training programme will be provided by NBCFDC. ii)	Stipend – Beneficiaries of skill training programme of NBCFDC are from socio-economic disadvantaged sections of the society comprise a special group. Accordingly, to cover the aspect of Boarding & lodging, travel costs as also other benefits for special area groups, the stipend amount @ Rs. 1000/- per month per trainee will be admissible for Fresh Courses subject to availability of funds with NBCFDC. Non- residential trainees having 80% and above attendance during the training programme will be eligible for stipend as a reimbursement for the to and fro travel from the training centre. The stipend will be disbursed through DBT by the SSCs/Training Institutes to the eligible trainees at the end of training programme in terms of clause 5.2 of Schedule I of Common Norms.For reskilling & RPL payment to candidate will be as incorporated in MSDE norms.No stipend will be admissible in case of Residential Programmes. 7.	ELIGIBILITY OF TRAINING INSTITUTE:-7.1	The Skill Development will be got carried out through following categories of institutes, councils and training partners following the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) and complying to the Common Normsa)	The Institute under the aegis of Central Government & State Government.		b)	Sector Skill Councils – who sign MOAs with NBCFDC c)	Credible Training Partners, having good past track record, registered with National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) especially in areas of skilling including where the concerned SSCs do not have working relations with NBCFDC or are not found to be proactive.7.2	To help fulfill the mandate of Corporation of promoting self-employment and sustainable livelihood of OBCs, training may also be got conducted by State Channelizing Agencies especially in disturbance prone areas such as J&K, North East etc. and Training Institute of Channel Partner Banks.7.3	The award of training to above categories of institutes/councils/training partners will be made based on proposals received from them which will normally be by way of request for proposals issued by the Corporation.8.	COMMENCEMENT OF TRAINING PROGRAMME:  8.1	The training institute/SSCs will initially submit list of eligible mobilized candidates for proposed training programme along with original minutes of the meeting of selection committee, mode of publicity and demand of funds. 8.2	The Training Institutes/SSCs need to accept the terms & conditions of Letter of Intent (LOI) issued by NBCFDC.  The receipt of Letter of Intent signed by Training Providers will construe as the sanction which will be valid for ongoing financial year only. 8.3	The programme should commence within one month from date of release of first instalment of sanctioned amount which will be released proportionately for the numbers of selected trainees.9	BASE COSTSSkill Development training costs under NBCFDC scheme will be paid at the rates as given in SCHEDULE-I of Common Norms as issued by MSDE in respect of each trainee who successfully completes the training and is assessed and certified by third party as per govt. guidelines10.	RELEASE OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE The sanctioned amount of Training Cost will be released in two installments of 50% each. Additionally the stipend amount paid to the beneficiaries as also a part of the assessment charges, also be reimbursed.10.1	First Installment of 50% of the sanctioned amount will be released proportionately (as part of 30% advance payment as stipulated in the Common Norms and to additionally cover the expenses for payment of stipend and/or accommodation charges etc. in case of residential training) on receipt of the following documents:(i)	list of trainees alongwith acceptance of sanction letter and terms & conditions for the same as appended (signature & Stamp of authorized signatory should be put on each page)(ii)	Original Minutes of Selection Committee meeting duly signed & stamped by its members following point no. iv of General Terms & Conditions.(iii)	Demand for release as per list submitted in Annexure I.(iv)	Mode of Publicity/Copies of Advertisements with details of Newspapers with Dates.(v)	Undertaking (Annexure-II)(vi)	List of Training Institutes/Partners for each location with Skype ID/Mobile No. and details of contact person and complete postal address be given alongwith center-wise/districtwise list of trainees.10.2	Second Installment of 50%  of sanctioned amount and stipend amount, if applicable, will be released on receipt of following:i.	List of successful trainees along with complete details of each trainee with certified attendance sheets (bio-metric) for each Centre.ii.	Annexure III to IV duly filled in all respects (Attached) iii.	Utilization Certificate on GFR 12-A (for the Ist installment) alonwith statement of Expenditure Annexure -V duly certified by Head of Institute & Chartered Accountant. (Attached)iv.	Details of disbursement of stipend through DBT, if any, duly certified by authorized signatory.(format attached)v.	Photographs of each training programme of the candidates (in group) and in working posture.vi.	Analytical Statement of feedback forms.vii.	a)  Proof of placement of minimum 70% of the candidates in wage/self -employment alongwith details of their wages per month and contact details with address of companies where they are placed and be uploaded on the website of the Training Institute.b)	In case of re-skilling, the clause 4.2 of Common Norms be adhered to.viii.	In case of self-employment, the Training Institute/Sector Skill Council should provide the details of mode of self-employment through NBCFDC loans/Self Finance/Bank loans etc., if any.ix.	Registration of Job Portal and Entry of Trainees Dataa)	Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils have to register on the Job Portal b)	The User IDs and Passwords entered will be approved by NBCFDCc)	Trainees details will be entered by Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils on the Portal10.3	Payment & Reimbursement of Stipend to Beneficiaries	Stipend amount for fresh training courses as mentioned in Letter of Intent will be released on submission of proof of transfer of stipend to the eligible candidates (having 80% attendance) through digital means. 11.	REFUND/ADJUSTMENTS i)	In case of no. of trainees successfully completing the training is lesser than the no. of trainees for which sanction was accorded and funds released, then the amount proportionate in respect of such lesser number would be adjusted in the release of final installment.ii)	NBCFDC reserves the right to withhold the payment of the balance amount and wherever deemed appropriate and demand refund of the first installment with Bank interest, if the SSCs/Training Institute  found to have misled NBCFDC by submitting incorrect information or deliberately suppressing relevant information. NBCFDC may consider to blacklist such Training Providers and inform the funding agencies of Central Govt. / State Govt.12.	INSPECTION Representative of NBCFDC shall have the right to inspect the account books, records of SSCs and interaction with the trainees as well as with the trainer and officials  of Training  Institute/SSCs/TPs.  NBCFDC may also interact telephonically or Skype/Video Conferencing with the trainees before, during and after the training to assess the quality and status of the training programme/trainees.13.	SUPPORT FOR BOARDING & LODGING/TRANSPORT Will be available as per need within Common Norms subject to availability of funds. 14.	THIRD PARTY CERTIFICATION & ASSESSMENT  14.1. To ensure independent and unbiased assessment and certification of trained candidates, the Training Institute will be required to arrange for assessment and certification as per Govt. guidelines. Accordingly the NBCFDC funds will be released for the successful trainees only. 14.2. Assessment charges will be shared, subject to availability of funds, only if the Training programme under NBCFDC scheme is completed within 8 months of sanction of training programmes during financial year. NBCFDC will bear the cost of assessment charges of the training conducted as per the details below:i.	For Fresh training		- 	Rs. 600/- per trainees (maximum)ii.	For Reskilling 		-	Rs. 400/- per trainee (maximum)The above will be applicable only for one-time assessment. Reassessment charges if incurred by SSC/ TI will not be reimbursed by NBCFDC.   14.3. The assessment charges will be released on submission of the following documents:i.	Bill from SSC/TIsii.	Bill submitted by Assessment Agency to SSC/TI along with original assessment reportiii.	Proof of transfer of assessment charges in the account of Assessment agencyiv.	Copy of assignment of work to Assessment Agencyv.	Proof of affiliation of Assessment Agency with SSC/TI. 15. 	PROCEDURE FOR SELECTION OF TRAINEES BY TRAINING PROVIDERS Selection Committee for selection of eligible candidates will be formed at local and comprising of a)	representative of State Channelizing Agency/RRB/Nationalized Bankb)	representative of Social Welfare Dept./Collector Office/Govt. officials from Distt. Administrations.c)	representatives from concerned Industry d)	representative from training institute/SSC/Training Partnere)	representative of NBCFDC*Atleast 3 members from above should be present in the meeting of selection committeeTransparent system of selection of trainees need to be adopted by the Training Providers. 		Preference be given to female applicants of target group.  16.	MONITORING & TRACKING The NBCFDC shall have access to an open, common and extensive data of SSCs/TIs to ensure NBCFDC IT systems can import data for its job portal. The training institutes will track the trainees as per Govt. guidelines from the date of completion/certification of training with respect to their career progression, retention and other parameters.  17. AUTOMATIC VALIDATION OF GOVERNMENT GUIDELINES As NBCFDC is receiving a major part of its grant from Government of India for undertaking skill development activities, this scheme will require to be read along with any guidelines/directives received with regards to the skilling programme from the administrative department/ministry********* Annexure-BNational Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation SKILL DEVELOPMENT TRAINING SCHEME OF NBCFDC1.	OBJECTIVESTo facilitate Skill Development Training in broad conformance to the Common Norms for upgradation of technical and entrepreneurial skills through Govt.  Training Institutes/organizations, Sector Skill Councils constituted by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and such reputed Training Institutes affiliated to National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Council (SSCs) and have entered into MOU with NBCFDC, so that eligible members of target group may engage in developmental activities by way of self-employment or wage employment.2.	ELIGIBILITY Training may be provided to the target group of NBCFDC who are specifically categorized and certified as under:a.	Beneficiaries should belong to either a caste categorized as OBC under State and/or Central Govt. list with annual family income below Rs. 3.00 Lakh or communities categorized as De-Notified, Semi-Nomadic & Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) or to category of Economically Backward Classes (EBCs) or be Sr. Citizens or Transgender or Member of Beggars’ Community or Victim of Substance Abuse .b.	In case of OBC, the caste categorization under OBC may be confirmed to be appearing in Centre list at website www.ncbc.gov.in or the designated State Govt. list. Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.3.00 Lakhs.c.	In case of EBCs, there will be no caste certificate required, however, Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.1.00 Lakh.d.	For compliance of annual family income as defined at b) and c) above, the Annual Family income certificate issued by the appropriate authority of the State Government or self-certified and duly endorsed by a Gazetted officer as defined by the appropriate government will be acceptable. It is explicitly clarified that endorsement by public representatives, Gram Pradhan, Sarpanch, Councilor, notaries etc. will not be acceptable.  Further, valid Below Poverty Line (BPL) card and Antodaya Anna Yojna (AAY) cards will also be acceptable as commensurate proof of annual family income of the beneficiary being within Rs. 1.00 Lakh per annum.e.	In case of DNT Community, given their extremely deprived & migratory nature, exemption has been given for insistence of caste certificate, income certificate, proof of age and permanent address. In absence of this, the training providers can take undertaking in the form of self-declaration of the candidate of his/her specific caste, date of birth and address alongwith the endorsement by the local Pradhan of the Community/Cluster to this effect. It would require to be, however, confirmed by the training provider that the caste of the candidate comes under the DNT category as defined in the Annexure-VII of the DNT Commission Report. There will be no income criteria for DNTs.f.	In case of Senior Citizen, the age of person should be 60 years or above. Age should be authenticated through valid proof viz. certificate of educational qualification, Adhaar Card, Pan Card, Driving License etc. There will be no caste or income criteria for            Sr. Citizens. g.	In case of transgender, exemption has been given for caste category and income limit. The member of transgender community needs to obtain certificate of identity issued by District Magistrate based on recommendation of a District Screening Committee, which will comprise the Chief Medical Officer, District Social Welfare Officer, Psychologist or psychiatrist and a representative of transgender community. h.	In case of Beggars, the person as defined in The Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959 should be:i.	Soliciting or receiving alms, in a public place whether or not under any pretence such as singing, dancing, fortune telling, performing tricks or offering any article for sale; ii.	entering any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; iii.	exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound injury, deformity or disease whether of a human being or of an animal; iv.	having no visible means of subsistence and wandering about or remaining in any public place in such condition or manner, as makes it likely that the person doing so exists by soliciting or receiving alms;v.	allowing oneself to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving almsi.	In case of victims of substance abuse, any certificate issued by treatment clinic, Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCA) may be accepted.j.	Minimum age should be 18 Years at the time of assessment/certification except for Sr. Citizens.k.	In the case of migrant population, Income & Caste Certificates issued by their State of original domicile will be acceptable.Note: Eligibility criteria will be broadly as stipulated vide relevant Govt. guidelines directives issued/communicated from time to time 3.	AGE The training are to be normally imparted to persons of target group who are of 18 Years and above on date of completion of assessment/certification. However, in special case such as hereditary artisanal trades, training may be imparted to beneficiaries less than 18 years of age subject to the limits defined in the respective Qualification packs and based on justification of the SSC/TI.4.	DURATION OF TRAINING 	As per common norms issued by MSDE from time to time. i)	Fresh:  Minimum 200 Hrs. and/or as per National Occupation Standard (NOS)ii)	Skill Up-gradation (including Reskilling, RPL) : 32-80 Hrs.5.	COURSEAll skill development courses offered under the scheme must broadly conform to the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF). 6.	AMOUNT OF GRANT-IN-AID i)	100% of the total training cost or course fee of the training programme will be provided by NBCFDC. ii)	Stipend – Beneficiaries of skill training programme of NBCFDC are from socio-economic disadvantaged sections of the society comprise a special group. Accordingly, to cover the aspect of Boarding & lodging, travel costs as also other benefits for special area groups, the stipend amount @ Rs. 1000/- per month per trainee will be admissible for Fresh Courses subject to availability of funds with NBCFDC. Non- residential trainees having 80% and above attendance during the training programme will be eligible for stipend as a reimbursement for the to and fro travel from the training centre. The stipend will be disbursed through DBT by the SSCs/Training Institutes to the eligible trainees at the end of training programme in terms of clause 5.2 of Schedule I of Common Norms.For reskilling & RPL payment to candidate will be as incorporated in MSDE norms.No stipend will be admissible in case of Residential Programmes. 7.	ELIGIBILITY OF TRAINING INSTITUTE:-7.1	The Skill Development will be got carried out through following categories of institutes, councils and training partners following the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) and complying to the Common Normsa)	The Institute under the aegis of Central Government & State Government.		b)	Sector Skill Councils – who sign MOAs with NBCFDC c)	Credible Training Partners, having good past track record, registered with National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) especially in areas of skilling including where the concerned SSCs do not have working relations with NBCFDC or are not found to be proactive.7.2	To help fulfill the mandate of Corporation of promoting self-employment and sustainable livelihood of OBCs, training may also be got conducted by State Channelizing Agencies especially in disturbance prone areas such as J&K, North East etc. and Training Institute of Channel Partner Banks.7.3	The award of training to above categories of institutes/councils/training partners will be made based on proposals received from them which will normally be by way of request for proposals issued by the Corporation.8.	COMMENCEMENT OF TRAINING PROGRAMME:  8.1	The training institute/SSCs will initially submit list of eligible mobilized candidates for proposed training programme along with original minutes of the meeting of selection committee, mode of publicity and demand of funds. 8.2	The Training Institutes/SSCs need to accept the terms & conditions of Letter of Intent (LOI) issued by NBCFDC.  The receipt of Letter of Intent signed by Training Providers will construe as the sanction which will be valid for ongoing financial year only. 8.3	The programme should commence within one month from date of release of first instalment of sanctioned amount which will be released proportionately for the numbers of selected trainees.9	BASE COSTSSkill Development training costs under NBCFDC scheme will be paid at the rates as given in SCHEDULE-I of Common Norms as issued by MSDE in respect of each trainee who successfully completes the training and is assessed and certified by third party as per govt. guidelines10.	RELEASE OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE The sanctioned amount of Training Cost will be released in two installments of 50% each. Additionally the stipend amount paid to the beneficiaries as also a part of the assessment charges, also be reimbursed.10.1	First Installment of 50% of the sanctioned amount will be released proportionately (as part of 30% advance payment as stipulated in the Common Norms and to additionally cover the expenses for payment of stipend and/or accommodation charges etc. in case of residential training) on receipt of the following documents:(i)	list of trainees alongwith acceptance of sanction letter and terms & conditions for the same as appended (signature & Stamp of authorized signatory should be put on each page)(ii)	Original Minutes of Selection Committee meeting duly signed & stamped by its members following point no. iv of General Terms & Conditions.(iii)	Demand for release as per list submitted in Annexure I.(iv)	Mode of Publicity/Copies of Advertisements with details of Newspapers with Dates.(v)	Undertaking (Annexure-II)(vi)	List of Training Institutes/Partners for each location with Skype ID/Mobile No. and details of contact person and complete postal address be given alongwith center-wise/districtwise list of trainees.10.2	Second Installment of 50%  of sanctioned amount and stipend amount, if applicable, will be released on receipt of following:i.	List of successful trainees along with complete details of each trainee with certified attendance sheets (bio-metric) for each Centre.ii.	Annexure III to IV duly filled in all respects (Attached) iii.	Utilization Certificate on GFR 12-A (for the Ist installment) alonwith statement of Expenditure Annexure -V duly certified by Head of Institute & Chartered Accountant. (Attached)iv.	Details of disbursement of stipend through DBT, if any, duly certified by authorized signatory.(format attached)v.	Photographs of each training programme of the candidates (in group) and in working posture.vi.	Analytical Statement of feedback forms.vii.	a)  Proof of placement of minimum 70% of the candidates in wage/self -employment alongwith details of their wages per month and contact details with address of companies where they are placed and be uploaded on the website of the Training Institute.b)	In case of re-skilling, the clause 4.2 of Common Norms be adhered to.viii.	In case of self-employment, the Training Institute/Sector Skill Council should provide the details of mode of self-employment through NBCFDC loans/Self Finance/Bank loans etc., if any.ix.	Registration of Job Portal and Entry of Trainees Dataa)	Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils have to register on the Job Portal b)	The User IDs and Passwords entered will be approved by NBCFDCc)	Trainees details will be entered by Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils on the Portal10.3	Payment & Reimbursement of Stipend to Beneficiaries	Stipend amount for fresh training courses as mentioned in Letter of Intent will be released on submission of proof of transfer of stipend to the eligible candidates (having 80% attendance) through digital means. 11.	REFUND/ADJUSTMENTS i)	In case of no. of trainees successfully completing the training is lesser than the no. of trainees for which sanction was accorded and funds released, then the amount proportionate in respect of such lesser number would be adjusted in the release of final installment.ii)	NBCFDC reserves the right to withhold the payment of the balance amount and wherever deemed appropriate and demand refund of the first installment with Bank interest, if the SSCs/Training Institute  found to have misled NBCFDC by submitting incorrect information or deliberately suppressing relevant information. NBCFDC may consider to blacklist such Training Providers and inform the funding agencies of Central Govt. / State Govt.12.	INSPECTION Representative of NBCFDC shall have the right to inspect the account books, records of SSCs and interaction with the trainees as well as with the trainer and officials  of Training  Institute/SSCs/TPs.  NBCFDC may also interact telephonically or Skype/Video Conferencing with the trainees before, during and after the training to assess the quality and status of the training programme/trainees.13.	SUPPORT FOR BOARDING & LODGING/TRANSPORT Will be available as per need within Common Norms subject to availability of funds. 14.	THIRD PARTY CERTIFICATION & ASSESSMENT  14.1. To ensure independent and unbiased assessment and certification of trained candidates, the Training Institute will be required to arrange for assessment and certification as per Govt. guidelines. Accordingly the NBCFDC funds will be released for the successful trainees only. 14.2. Assessment charges will be shared, subject to availability of funds, only if the Training programme under NBCFDC scheme is completed within 8 months of sanction of training programmes during financial year. NBCFDC will bear the cost of assessment charges of the training conducted as per the details below:i.	For Fresh training		- 	Rs. 600/- per trainees (maximum)ii.	For Reskilling 		-	Rs. 400/- per trainee (maximum)The above will be applicable only for one-time assessment. Reassessment charges if incurred by SSC/ TI will not be reimbursed by NBCFDC.   14.3. The assessment charges will be released on submission of the following documents:i.	Bill from SSC/TIsii.	Bill submitted by Assessment Agency to SSC/TI along with original assessment reportiii.	Proof of transfer of assessment charges in the account of Assessment agencyiv.	Copy of assignment of work to Assessment Agencyv.	Proof of affiliation of Assessment Agency with SSC/TI. 15. 	PROCEDURE FOR SELECTION OF TRAINEES BY TRAINING PROVIDERS Selection Committee for selection of eligible candidates will be formed at local and comprising of a)	representative of State Channelizing Agency/RRB/Nationalized Bankb)	representative of Social Welfare Dept./Collector Office/Govt. officials from Distt. Administrations.c)	representatives from concerned Industry d)	representative from training institute/SSC/Training Partnere)	representative of NBCFDC*Atleast 3 members from above should be present in the meeting of selection committeeTransparent system of selection of trainees need to be adopted by the Training Providers. 		Preference be given to female applicants of target group.  16.	MONITORING & TRACKING The NBCFDC shall have access to an open, common and extensive data of SSCs/TIs to ensure NBCFDC IT systems can import data for its job portal. The training institutes will track the trainees as per Govt. guidelines from the date of completion/certification of training with respect to their career progression, retention and other parameters.  17. AUTOMATIC VALIDATION OF GOVERNMENT GUIDELINES As NBCFDC is receiving a major part of its grant from Government of India for undertaking skill development activities, this scheme will require to be read along with any guidelines/directives received with regards to the skilling programme from the administrative department/ministry********* Annexure-BNational Backward Classes Finance & Development Corporation SKILL DEVELOPMENT TRAINING SCHEME OF NBCFDC1.	OBJECTIVESTo facilitate Skill Development Training in broad conformance to the Common Norms for upgradation of technical and entrepreneurial skills through Govt.  Training Institutes/organizations, Sector Skill Councils constituted by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and such reputed Training Institutes affiliated to National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Council (SSCs) and have entered into MOU with NBCFDC, so that eligible members of target group may engage in developmental activities by way of self-employment or wage employment.2.	ELIGIBILITY Training may be provided to the target group of NBCFDC who are specifically categorized and certified as under:a.	Beneficiaries should belong to either a caste categorized as OBC under State and/or Central Govt. list with annual family income below Rs. 3.00 Lakh or communities categorized as De-Notified, Semi-Nomadic & Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) or to category of Economically Backward Classes (EBCs) or be Sr. Citizens or Transgender or Member of Beggars’ Community or Victim of Substance Abuse .b.	In case of OBC, the caste categorization under OBC may be confirmed to be appearing in Centre list at website www.ncbc.gov.in or the designated State Govt. list. Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.3.00 Lakhs.c.	In case of EBCs, there will be no caste certificate required, however, Annual Family income from all sources should be below Rs.1.00 Lakh.d.	For compliance of annual family income as defined at b) and c) above, the Annual Family income certificate issued by the appropriate authority of the State Government or self-certified and duly endorsed by a Gazetted officer as defined by the appropriate government will be acceptable. It is explicitly clarified that endorsement by public representatives, Gram Pradhan, Sarpanch, Councilor, notaries etc. will not be acceptable.  Further, valid Below Poverty Line (BPL) card and Antodaya Anna Yojna (AAY) cards will also be acceptable as commensurate proof of annual family income of the beneficiary being within Rs. 1.00 Lakh per annum.e.	In case of DNT Community, given their extremely deprived & migratory nature, exemption has been given for insistence of caste certificate, income certificate, proof of age and permanent address. In absence of this, the training providers can take undertaking in the form of self-declaration of the candidate of his/her specific caste, date of birth and address alongwith the endorsement by the local Pradhan of the Community/Cluster to this effect. It would require to be, however, confirmed by the training provider that the caste of the candidate comes under the DNT category as defined in the Annexure-VII of the DNT Commission Report. There will be no income criteria for DNTs.f.	In case of Senior Citizen, the age of person should be 60 years or above. Age should be authenticated through valid proof viz. certificate of educational qualification, Adhaar Card, Pan Card, Driving License etc. There will be no caste or income criteria for            Sr. Citizens. g.	In case of transgender, exemption has been given for caste category and income limit. The member of transgender community needs to obtain certificate of identity issued by District Magistrate based on recommendation of a District Screening Committee, which will comprise the Chief Medical Officer, District Social Welfare Officer, Psychologist or psychiatrist and a representative of transgender community. h.	In case of Beggars, the person as defined in The Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959 should be:i.	Soliciting or receiving alms, in a public place whether or not under any pretence such as singing, dancing, fortune telling, performing tricks or offering any article for sale; ii.	entering any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; iii.	exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound injury, deformity or disease whether of a human being or of an animal; iv.	having no visible means of subsistence and wandering about or remaining in any public place in such condition or manner, as makes it likely that the person doing so exists by soliciting or receiving alms;v.	allowing oneself to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving almsi.	In case of victims of substance abuse, any certificate issued by treatment clinic, Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCA) may be accepted.j.	Minimum age should be 18 Years at the time of assessment/certification except for Sr. Citizens.k.	In the case of migrant population, Income & Caste Certificates issued by their State of original domicile will be acceptable.Note: Eligibility criteria will be broadly as stipulated vide relevant Govt. guidelines directives issued/communicated from time to time 3.	AGE The training are to be normally imparted to persons of target group who are of 18 Years and above on date of completion of assessment/certification. However, in special case such as hereditary artisanal trades, training may be imparted to beneficiaries less than 18 years of age subject to the limits defined in the respective Qualification packs and based on justification of the SSC/TI.4.	DURATION OF TRAINING 	As per common norms issued by MSDE from time to time. i)	Fresh:  Minimum 200 Hrs. and/or as per National Occupation Standard (NOS)ii)	Skill Up-gradation (including Reskilling, RPL) : 32-80 Hrs.5.	COURSEAll skill development courses offered under the scheme must broadly conform to the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF). 6.	AMOUNT OF GRANT-IN-AID i)	100% of the total training cost or course fee of the training programme will be provided by NBCFDC. ii)	Stipend – Beneficiaries of skill training programme of NBCFDC are from socio-economic disadvantaged sections of the society comprise a special group. Accordingly, to cover the aspect of Boarding & lodging, travel costs as also other benefits for special area groups, the stipend amount @ Rs. 1000/- per month per trainee will be admissible for Fresh Courses subject to availability of funds with NBCFDC. Non- residential trainees having 80% and above attendance during the training programme will be eligible for stipend as a reimbursement for the to and fro travel from the training centre. The stipend will be disbursed through DBT by the SSCs/Training Institutes to the eligible trainees at the end of training programme in terms of clause 5.2 of Schedule I of Common Norms.For reskilling & RPL payment to candidate will be as incorporated in MSDE norms.No stipend will be admissible in case of Residential Programmes. 7.	ELIGIBILITY OF TRAINING INSTITUTE:-7.1	The Skill Development will be got carried out through following categories of institutes, councils and training partners following the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) and complying to the Common Normsa)	The Institute under the aegis of Central Government & State Government.		b)	Sector Skill Councils – who sign MOAs with NBCFDC c)	Credible Training Partners, having good past track record, registered with National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and/or Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) especially in areas of skilling including where the concerned SSCs do not have working relations with NBCFDC or are not found to be proactive.7.2	To help fulfill the mandate of Corporation of promoting self-employment and sustainable livelihood of OBCs, training may also be got conducted by State Channelizing Agencies especially in disturbance prone areas such as J&K, North East etc. and Training Institute of Channel Partner Banks.7.3	The award of training to above categories of institutes/councils/training partners will be made based on proposals received from them which will normally be by way of request for proposals issued by the Corporation.8.	COMMENCEMENT OF TRAINING PROGRAMME:  8.1	The training institute/SSCs will initially submit list of eligible mobilized candidates for proposed training programme along with original minutes of the meeting of selection committee, mode of publicity and demand of funds. 8.2	The Training Institutes/SSCs need to accept the terms & conditions of Letter of Intent (LOI) issued by NBCFDC.  The receipt of Letter of Intent signed by Training Providers will construe as the sanction which will be valid for ongoing financial year only. 8.3	The programme should commence within one month from date of release of first instalment of sanctioned amount which will be released proportionately for the numbers of selected trainees.9	BASE COSTSSkill Development training costs under NBCFDC scheme will be paid at the rates as given in SCHEDULE-I of Common Norms as issued by MSDE in respect of each trainee who successfully completes the training and is assessed and certified by third party as per govt. guidelines10.	RELEASE OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE The sanctioned amount of Training Cost will be released in two installments of 50% each. Additionally the stipend amount paid to the beneficiaries as also a part of the assessment charges, also be reimbursed.10.1	First Installment of 50% of the sanctioned amount will be released proportionately (as part of 30% advance payment as stipulated in the Common Norms and to additionally cover the expenses for payment of stipend and/or accommodation charges etc. in case of residential training) on receipt of the following documents:(i)	list of trainees alongwith acceptance of sanction letter and terms & conditions for the same as appended (signature & Stamp of authorized signatory should be put on each page)(ii)	Original Minutes of Selection Committee meeting duly signed & stamped by its members following point no. iv of General Terms & Conditions.(iii)	Demand for release as per list submitted in Annexure I.(iv)	Mode of Publicity/Copies of Advertisements with details of Newspapers with Dates.(v)	Undertaking (Annexure-II)(vi)	List of Training Institutes/Partners for each location with Skype ID/Mobile No. and details of contact person and complete postal address be given alongwith center-wise/districtwise list of trainees.10.2	Second Installment of 50%  of sanctioned amount and stipend amount, if applicable, will be released on receipt of following:i.	List of successful trainees along with complete details of each trainee with certified attendance sheets (bio-metric) for each Centre.ii.	Annexure III to IV duly filled in all respects (Attached) iii.	Utilization Certificate on GFR 12-A (for the Ist installment) alonwith statement of Expenditure Annexure -V duly certified by Head of Institute & Chartered Accountant. (Attached)iv.	Details of disbursement of stipend through DBT, if any, duly certified by authorized signatory.(format attached)v.	Photographs of each training programme of the candidates (in group) and in working posture.vi.	Analytical Statement of feedback forms.vii.	a)  Proof of placement of minimum 70% of the candidates in wage/self -employment alongwith details of their wages per month and contact details with address of companies where they are placed and be uploaded on the website of the Training Institute.b)	In case of re-skilling, the clause 4.2 of Common Norms be adhered to.viii.	In case of self-employment, the Training Institute/Sector Skill Council should provide the details of mode of self-employment through NBCFDC loans/Self Finance/Bank loans etc., if any.ix.	Registration of Job Portal and Entry of Trainees Dataa)	Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils have to register on the Job Portal b)	The User IDs and Passwords entered will be approved by NBCFDCc)	Trainees details will be entered by Training Institutes/Sector Skill Councils on the Portal10.3	Payment & Reimbursement of Stipend to Beneficiaries	Stipend amount for fresh training courses as mentioned in Letter of Intent will be released on submission of proof of transfer of stipend to the eligible candidates (having 80% attendance) through digital means. 11.	REFUND/ADJUSTMENTS i)	In case of no. of trainees successfully completing the training is lesser than the no. of trainees for which sanction was accorded and funds released, then the amount proportionate in respect of such lesser number would be adjusted in the release of final installment.ii)	NBCFDC reserves the right to withhold the payment of the balance amount and wherever deemed appropriate and demand refund of the first installment with Bank interest, if the SSCs/Training Institute  found to have misled NBCFDC by submitting incorrect information or deliberately suppressing relevant information. NBCFDC may consider to blacklist such Training Providers and inform the funding agencies of Central Govt. / State Govt.12.	INSPECTION Representative of NBCFDC shall have the right to inspect the account books, records of SSCs and interaction with the trainees as well as with the trainer and officials  of Training  Institute/SSCs/TPs.  NBCFDC may also interact telephonically or Skype/Video Conferencing with the trainees before, during and after the training to assess the quality and status of the training programme/trainees.13.	SUPPORT FOR BOARDING & LODGING/TRANSPORT Will be available as per need within Common Norms subject to availability of funds. 14.	THIRD PARTY CERTIFICATION & ASSESSMENT  14.1. To ensure independent and unbiased assessment and certification of trained candidates, the Training Institute will be required to arrange for assessment and certification as per Govt. guidelines. Accordingly the NBCFDC funds will be released for the successful trainees only. 14.2. Assessment charges will be shared, subject to availability of funds, only if the Training programme under NBCFDC scheme is completed within 8 months of sanction of training programmes during financial year. NBCFDC will bear the cost of assessment charges of the training conducted as per the details below:i.	For Fresh training		- 	Rs. 600/- per trainees (maximum)ii.	For Reskilling 		-	Rs. 400/- per trainee (maximum)The above will be applicable only for one-time assessment. Reassessment charges if incurred by SSC/ TI will not be reimbursed by NBCFDC.   14.3. The assessment charges will be released on submission of the following documents:i.	Bill from SSC/TIsii.	Bill submitted by Assessment Agency to SSC/TI along with original assessment reportiii.	Proof of transfer of assessment charges in the account of Assessment agencyiv.	Copy of assignment of work to Assessment Agencyv.	Proof of affiliation of Assessment Agency with SSC/TI. 15. 	PROCEDURE FOR SELECTION OF TRAINEES BY TRAINING PROVIDERS Selection Committee for selection of eligible candidates will be formed at local and comprising of a)	representative of State Channelizing Agency/RRB/Nationalized Bankb)	representative of Social Welfare Dept./Collector Office/Govt. officials from Distt. Administrations.c)	representatives from concerned Industry d)	representative from training institute/SSC/Training Partnere)	representative of NBCFDC*Atleast 3 members from above should be present in the meeting of selection committeeTransparent system of selection of trainees need to be adopted by the Training Providers. 		Preference be given to female applicants of target group.  16.	MONITORING & TRACKING The NBCFDC shall have access to an open, common and extensive data of SSCs/TIs to ensure NBCFDC IT systems can import data for its job portal. The training institutes will track the trainees as per Govt. guidelines from the date of completion/certification of training with respect to their career progression, retention and other parameters.  17. AUTOMATIC VALIDATION OF GOVERNMENT GUIDELINES As NBCFDC is receiving a major part of its grant from Government of India for undertaking skill development activities, this scheme will require to be read along with any guidelines/directives received with regards to the skilling programme from the administrative department/ministry********* 
























HomeArchiveIndex to Select Questions (1984-1999)Ballot ListStatistical Statements Relating to QuestionsUploading of Questions - Status QueryProcedure for Sending Text of Questions & AnswersDemarcation of responsibilities in Govt. of IndiaBrochure on Statutory Corporations, Companies and Other Bodies in Which the Government of India have financial or controlling interestHighlights pertaining to questions of 17th Lok Sabha






Contact Us 
Disclaimer











        Developed and Hosted by National Informatics Centre (NIC)

Content on this website is published,
            managed & maintained by Software Unit, Computer (HW & SW) Management. Branch,
            Lok Sabha Secretariat





HomeMembersBusinessQuestionsDebatesPapers Laid


LegislationCommitteesSANSAD TVIntranetSecretariatPRIDE


RecruitmentSC/ST ReservationConferenceParliament Library


About ParliamentPhoto GalleryRelated LinksRTITendersFAQ


SpeakerDy. SpeakerLeader of the HousePanel of ChairpersonsContact UsFeedback


Council of MinistersPublications of MinistriesParliamentry ProceduresJournal of Parliamentary Information
Visitor's Counter:113175500







Copyright
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Terms &
                Conditions

                Accessibility Statement
Accessibility
                Options
Feedback
Site Map







