



	Questions : Lok Sabha




























Screen Reader Access
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Navigation



Text Size

                                A

                                A
A















हिन्दी मे








Parliament of India Lok Sabha House of the
                        People






* Special Characters not allowed












India Time 


Your Time 


                        Tuesday,
                        12 April 2022









HomeMembersSitting MembersMembers Home PageMembers' PortalContact DetailsMembers SearchStatistical AnalysisAttendance of MembersHandbook Members Since 1952Digitized Who's WhoOthers BusinessProvisional CalendarList of BusinessPapers to be LaidList of Private Members' BusinessBulletin-IDigitized Lok Sabha Bulletin Part IBulletin-IIStatement of WorkSpecial Mentions (ZERO HOUR)Resume of WorkDigitized Resume of Work done by Lok Sabha QuestionsHomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions DebatesIntroductionSynopsisUncorrected DebateText of DebateDigitized DebatesConstituent Assembly DebatesWit And HumourDebate SearchHindi FontsDisclaimer Papers LaidPapers Laid on the Table of the House LegislationIntroduction(How Bill Becomes Act)Bills IntroducedBills PassedBills PendingBills AssentedBills LapsedBills WithdrawnBills NegativedBills Search Disclaimer CommitteesIntroductionChairpersonSummary of WorkCommittee Meetings ScheduleBills Referred to CommitteesReports PresentedDigitized ReportsPress ReleaseMembership SearchToday's Committee MeetingsCommittee Subject SelectedDepartment Related-RS Govt. AssurancesSANSAD TVIntranet





HomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions











Download as PDF




Print












PDF/WORD(Hindi)


PDF/WORD




                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
                                





                                    MINISTRY OF
                                    EXTERNAL AFFAIRS






                                    LOK SABHA
                                





UNSTARRED 


                                    QUESTION NO:
                                

4695






                                    ANSWERED ON: 
                                

24.03.2021






Indo-Uzbekistan Summit




Subhash Ramrao Bhamre













                                                    Amol Ramsing Kolhe
                                                








                                                    Sunil Dattatray Tatkare
                                                








                                                    Kuldeep Rai Sharma
                                                








                                                    Supriya Sadanand Sule
                                                








                                                    DNV Senthilkumar. S.
                                                












                        Will the Minister of





EXTERNAL AFFAIRS


                        be pleased to state:-















(a)	whether the Indo-Uzbekistan virtual Summit was concluded recently and if so, the details thereof alongwith the issues discussed;(b)	whether a declaration for mutual cooperation in various fields between India and Uzbekistan was signed during the Summit;(c)	if so, the details thereof and the details of the objectives to be achieved thereby; (d)	the steps taken by the Government in pursuance thereto;(e)	the number of virtual summits India had with other countries in the year 2020 and the current year and the outcome thereof; and (f) 	the details of other steps taken to enhance cooperation between India and Uzbekistan?






ANSWER




                                                        THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS[SHRI V. MURALEEDHARAN](a)    	 The India- Uzbekistan Virtual Summit was held on 11 December 2020. Issues related to bilateral cooperation in political, trade and investment, development cooperation, connectivity, defence, security, space, capacity building, education, health and cultural sphere and international issues of mutual interest including cooperation in the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and Afghanistan were discussed during the Summit.(b) 	Yes.(c)  	Following the Summit, a Joint Statement on “India-Uzbekistan Virtual Summit: Close Friendship, Strong Partnership” was issued encompassing various issues of mutual interest and measures of cooperation. Following agreements for cooperation in various fields were also signed coinciding with the Virtual Summit:1. Dollar Credit Line Agreement between Export-Import Bank of India and Government of Republic of Uzbekistan2. Memorandum of Understanding between Government of India and Government of Uzbekistan regarding Indian Grant Assistance for Implementation of High Impact Community Development Projects Through Local Bodies; 3. Memorandum of Cooperation between the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology of India and the Ministry for Development of Information Technologies of Uzbekistan in the area of Digital Technologies; 4.  Memorandum of Understanding between National Institute of Solar Energy, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India and International Solar Energy Institute, Uzbekistan;5.  Memorandum of Understanding between Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy of India and the Academy of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Uzbekistan;6. Memorandum of Understanding between Indian Institute of Mass Communication and University of Journalism and Mass Communication of Uzbekistan.7. Memorandum of Cooperation between Indian Computer Emergency Response Team Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology of India and the State unitary enterprise “Cybersecurity center” of Uzbekistan;8. Agreement on Mutual Recognition of results of products Conformity Assessment between Bureau of Indian Standards and The Uzbek Agency for Standardization, Metrology and Certification;9. Memorandum of Understanding between Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs of India and the State Customs Committee of Uzbekistan on exchange of information on pre-arrival of goods moved across the state border. (d)	Concerned Ministries/ agencies are working for implementation of the above-mentioned agreements.(e)  The virtual Summits India had with other countries in the year 2020 and the current year- Bilateral <pre>S. No.Name of Summit and participating country/ies with datesLevel of ParticipationOutcome1India-Australia Leaders’ Summit (Virtual)04 June, 2020Prime Ministers of both countriesElevation of the bilateral Strategic Partnership between India and Australia to a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership (CSP).i) In addition to Joint Statement on a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, the Prime Ministerial Summit delivered eight agreements/MoUs to drive cooperation with Australia. It included (i) Joint Declaration on a Shared Vision for Maritime Cooperation in the Indo - Pacific;(ii) Arrangement concerning Mutual Logistics Support (MLSA); (iii) Framework Arrangement on Cyber and Cyber-Enabled Critical Technology Cooperation; (iv) MoU on Cooperation in the field of Mining and Processing of Critical and Strategic Minerals; (v) Implementing Arrangement concerning cooperation in Defence Science and Technology to the MoU on Defence Cooperation; (vi) MoU on Co-operation in the field of Public Administration and Governance Reforms; (vii) MoU on Cooperation in Vocational Education and Training; and (viii) MoU on Water Resources Management.2India-Sri Lanka  Bilateral Summit (virtual)26 September, 2020Prime Ministers of both countries  It was our Prime Minister’s first such virtual engagement with a neighbouring country and also Sri Lankan Prime Minister Mahinda Rajapaksa’s first diplomatic engagement with a leader of a foreign country after he was sworn in as PM on 09 August 2020.The Virtual Bilateral Summit gave an opportunity to the two leaders to comprehensively review the broad framework of the bilateral relationship in the context of the time-tested friendly ties between the two countries and give broad political direction for a strengthened and deepened collaborative partnership on key issues of mutual interest. A Joint Statement “Mitratva Magga” was issued by both the nations on the occasion.3India – Denmark summit (virtual)September, 2020Prime Ministers of both countriesEstablishment of a Green Strategic Partnership (GSP) between India and Denmark.The GSP is intended to advance political cooperation, expand economic relations and green growth, create jobs and strengthen cooperation on addressing global challenges and opportunities, with focus on an ambitious implementation of the Paris Agreement and the UN Sustainable Development Goals.Honb’le PM proposed setting up of ‘India-Denmark Green Energy Park’ in areas where there are large numbers of Danish companies, as well as an ‘India-Denmark Skill Institute’ so that the Danish companies will be able to get skilled manpower as per their requirement.Under GSP, India and Denmark will cooperate through relevant Ministries, institutions and stakeholders. Goals and actions will be identified within the enlisted areas and outlined in an Action Plan that will be worked out and endorsed as soon as possible.4India-Italy Summit (virtual)06 November , 2020Prime Ministers of both countries  India-Italy Joint Statement and Plan of Action 2020-2024 issued during the Virtual Summit in November 202015 MoUs/Agreements were concluded during the Summit in diverse areas covering trade, ship building, fisheries, design, energy, financing etc.5India-Luxembourg Summit (Virtual)19 November , 2020Prime Ministers of both countriesThe two Prime Ministers exchanged views on strengthening India-Luxembourg relationship in the post-COVID world, especially in the areas of financial technology, green financing, space applications, digital innovations and start-ups.The following Agreements were acknowledged during the Summiti) MoU between India International Exchange (India INX) and Luxembourg Stock Exchange for cooperation in financial services industry, securities market and green finance ii) MoU between State Bank of India and Luxembourg Stock Exchange for cooperation in financial services industry, securities market and green finance iii) MoU between Invest India and Luxinnovation for supporting and developing mutual business cooperation between Indian and Luxembourg companies, including promotion and facilitation of inbound FDI, coming from or proposed by Indian and Luxembourgish investors.6India - Bangladesh Summit (Virtual)17 December, 2020 Prime Ministers of both countries i) Framework of Understanding on Cooperation in the Hydrocarbon Sectorii) MoU regarding Indian Grant Assistance for Implementation of High Impact Community Development Projects through Local Bodies and other Public Sector Institutionsiii) Protocol on Transboundary Elephant Conservationiv) MoU for Supply of Equipment & Improvement of Garbage/Solid Waste Disposal Ground at Lamchori Area for Barishal City Corporationv) MoU on Cooperation in the field of Agriculturevi) MoU between Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Memorial Museum, Dhaka, Bangladesh and the National Museum, New Delhi, India7India–Vietnam Leaders’ Summit (Virtual)21 December, 2020Prime Ministers of both countries(a) Both the Prime Ministers adopted “Joint Vision Statement for Peace, Prosperity and Future”.(b) On the sideline of the Summit, following announcements and MoUs/Agreements were signed:i) Plan of Action for period 2021-2023 for further implementation of Comprehensive Strategic Partnership. To implement the “Joint Vision for Peace, Prosperity and People” through concrete actions proposed to be taken by both sides during 2021-2023.ii) Implementing Arrangement on Defence Industry Cooperation between Dept. of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence, India and General Dept. of Defence Industry, Ministry of National Defence, Vietnam. To provide a framework for promoting cooperation between the defence industries of the two countries.iii) Agreement for US$ 5 million Indian Grant Assistance for Army Software Park at National Telecommunications University, Nha Trang, Vietnam between Embassy of India, Hanoi and Telecommunications University, Ministry of National Defence, Vietnam. To facilitate setting up of IT infrastructure at the Army Software Park in Telecommunications University, Nha Trang, with provision for training and services in the field of software applications.iv) Implementing Arrangement between Centre for United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, India and Vietnam Dept. of Peacekeeping Operations for Cooperation in United Nation Peacekeeping. To identify specific activities for development of cooperation in the field of UN Peacekeeping.v) MOU between India’s Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) and Vietnam Agency for Radiation and Nuclear Safety (VARANS). To promote mutual cooperation between the regulatory bodies of the two countries in the fields of radiation protection and nuclear safety.vi) MOU between CSIR-Indian Institute of Petroleum and Vietnam Petroleum Institute. To promote cooperation in petroleum research and training.vii) MOU between Tata Memorial Centre of India and Vietnam National Cancer Hospital. To promote exchanges in the areas of training and scientific research, health care services, collaboration in diagnosis and treatment for cancer patients.viii) MOU between National Solar Federation of India and Vietnam Clean Energy Association. To promote exchange of knowledge, best practices, information between Indian and Vietnamese solar power industries and to explore new business opportunities to promote solar power in India and Vietnam.(c) Announcements:i) Implementation of the High Speed Guard Boat (HSGB) Manufacturing Project for Vietnam Border Guard Command under the US$ 100 million Defence Line of Credit extended by Government of India to Vietnam; handing over of one completed HSGB to Vietnam; launch of two HSGBs manufactured in India; and keel-laying of seven HSGBs to be manufactured in Vietnam.ii)  Completion and handing over of seven Development Projects with Indian ‘Grant-in-Aid’ Assistance of US$ 1.5 million for the benefit of local community in Vietnam’s Ninh Thuan province.iii) Enhancing the number of annual Quick Impact Projects (QIPs) from currently five to ten commencing FY 2021-2022.iv) Three new Development Partnership projects in heritage conservation in Vietnam (F-block of Temple at My Son; Dong Duong Buddhist Monastery in Quang Nam province; and Nhan Cham Tower in Phu Yen province).v) Launch of bilateral project for preparing an Encyclopedia on India – Vietnam Civilizational and Cultural Relations.8India-Sweden Summit (virtual)05 March, 2021Prime Ministers of both countries A Joint Statement was issued at the Virtual Summit. It included the following:Agreed to continue India-Sweden outreach to expand the membership of the Leadership Group on Industry Transition.Agreed that Indo-Swedish Joint Commission on Economic, Industrial and Scientific Cooperation will present proposals under the Joint Action Plan and Joint Innovation Partnership on further cooperation in innovation, health, and green recovery at its next meeting.Welcomed Sweden’s decision to join the International Solar AllianceWelcomed the creation of a Sweden-India Health Hub at AIIMS-Jodhpur.Welcomed the launch of a second joint industrial R&D call on Smart and Sustainable Cities, Transport Systems, Clean Technologies and Digitalization under India-Sweden Collaborative Industrial Research & Development Programme.Welcomed the India-Sweden Collaborative Industrial Research & Development Programme on Smart Grids.Welcomed the proposal of an MoU on Aviation Knowledge Exchange and Technical Transfer Programme.Welcomed the proposal of an MoU on cooperation between financial services to enhance cross-border participation and promote knowledge sharing.  Welcomed the steady increase in the presence of Swedish firms in India and Indian firms in Sweden. In this regard the two Prime Ministers welcomed the recent announcements by some major Swedish firms to make further investments in India, i.e. IKEA, H&M and Autoliv.Expressed appreciation for the longstanding cooperation under the MOU on Health. The two Prime Ministers agreed to strengthen bilateral cooperation on thematic areas such as elderly care, infection control, digitalization, non-communicable diseases, and start-ups.Welcomed the progress made in identifying specific areas of scientific collaboration in polar research such as joint research projects and participation in polar expeditions.Encouraged Indian and Swedish space actors to identify specific areas for future collaboration and seek mutually beneficial partnerships between both public and private sector organizations.Recognized the need to continue the strategic dialogue between the National Security Advisers and the National Security Council Secretariats for a deepened engagement on issues of mutual strategic interests, including cyber security.Welcomed the upcoming India-EU+27 Leaders’ Meeting in Portugal in May 2021.Prime Minister Mr. Stefan Löfven congratulated India on its eighth term as an elected member of the UN Security Council for 2021-2022.Reiterated strong commitment to multilateralism and peace and security. The two leaders also reaffirmed the need for wider reform of global governance structures towards greater democracy, transparency, and fairness and to better reflect account contemporary realities.Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi congratulated Sweden on assuming the Chairmanship of the OSCE.9India-Finland Summit (virtual)16 March, 2021Prime Ministers of both countries Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi and Prime Minister of the Republic of Finland H.E. Ms. Sanna Marin held a Virtual Summit  and discussed the entire gamut of bilateral issues as well as other regional and multilateral issues of mutual interest. A joint statement was issued following the Summit and the  two Prime Ministers-i) Announced a Digital Partnership in Future ICT, Future Mobile Technologies and Digital Education.ii) Announced a High-Level Dialogue in education between the Education Ministries of both countries.iii) Announced a Sustainability Partnership involving Renewable and Clean Energy, Circular Economy, and Sustainable Mobility and noted that green growth is an essential element of bilateral cooperation.iv) Endorsed the Joint Commission and the India-Finland Science & Technology Committee to steer and coordinate developments in their respective domains.v) Signing of the renewed MoU between consortium of ten Finnish universities and 23 IITs in India for cooperation in higher education sector.vi) Agreed that India and Finland are natural partners to enhance efforts for strengthening multilateralism, a rules-based international order, further the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and combat climate change.</pre>Multilateral Meetings <pre>S. No.Name of Summit and participating country/ies with datesLevel of ParticipationOutcome1Extraordinary G20 SummitAustralia, Argentina, Brazil, China, Canada, EU, France, Germany, Italy, Indonesia, India, Japan, Mexico, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, Russia, Turkey, Republic of Korea, USA, UKJordan, UAE, Singapore, Switzerland, Spain, Vietnam, Rwanda26 March, 2020 Prime Minister Extraordinary G20 Leaders’ Summit Statement on COVID-19 was issued.215th India-EU Summit15 July, 2020Prime Minister represented the Indian side while the European Council President Mr. Charles Michel and the European Commission President Ms. Ursula Von Der Leyen represented the EU.The Leaders reiterated their commitment to India-EU Strategic Partnership and discussed various issues including joint response to the pandemic, strengthening India-EUStrategic partnership & its various dimensions, as well as convergences and collaboration on the global arena covering multilateralism, international organizations & contemporary developments.The following documents/agreements were adopted during the Summit:i)  Joint Statementii) The India-EU Strategic Partnership: Roadmap to 2025iii)  Joint Declaration on Resource Efficiency and Circular Economy. iv) Agreement for Research and Development Cooperation in the field of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energyv) Agreement for Scientific and Technological Cooperation was renewed for another 5 years.3Meeting of the Council of Heads of State of Member States of Shanghai Cooperation Cooperation (SCO)  Russia hosted and chaired the virtual Summit level meeting.Other participating SCO Member States: India, Kazakhstan, China, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.10 November, 2020Prime Minister A Joint Declaration was adopted.417th ASEAN-India SummitIndia and 10 ASEAN Member States (Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam)12 November, 2020Prime Minister of Indiai) Review of ASEAN-India Cooperation and discussion on its future directions.ii) India announced USD 1 million contribution to COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fundiii) Adoption and noting of ASEAN-India Plan of Action (2021-2025)5BRICS SummitBrazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa 17 November, 2020Prime Ministers of Russia, India and Presidents of Brazil, China and South Africa BRICS Leaders’ Moscow Declaration was issued. 6G20 SummitAustralia, Argentina, Brazil, China, Canada, EU, France, Germany, Italy, Indonesia, India, Japan, Mexico, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, Russia, Turkey, Republic of Korea, USA, UKJordan, UAE, Singapore, Switzerland, Spain, Vietnam, Rwanda21-22 November, 2020Prime Minister Leaders adopted the G20 Riyadh Summit Leaders’ Declaration was issued.7Meeting of the Council of Heads of Government of Member States of Shanghai Cooperation.India hosted and chaired the virtual Summit level meeting.Other participating SCO Member States: Kazakhstan, China, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.30 November, 2020Heads of Government. Hon’ble Vice President Shri Venkaiah Naidu chaired the meeting. A Joint Communique was adopted.8Quad Leaders’ Summit (Virtual) India, USA, Japan and Australia12 March, 2021Prime Minister of India, Japan and Australia and President of USAA Joint Statement was issued on the occasion of the first Quad Leaders’ Virtual Summit. A Quad partnership for the supply of Covid-19 vaccines to the countries in the Indo-Pacific region was announced. Working Groups in vaccine partnership, climate and critical and emerging technology have also been established.</pre>Additional Inofrmation<pre>S. No.Name of Summit and participating country/ies with datesLevel of ParticipationOutcome1Virtual launch of RuPay card phase-II in Bhutan20 November, 2020 RuPay card phase-II was jointly launched by the Prime Ministers of India and Bhutan through virtual mode.  Launch of RuPay card Phase-II has enabled use of Bhutanese banks issued RuPay card in India. Earlier, the Prime Ministers of India and Bhutan had jointly launched Phase-I of the project during the State Visit of Prime Minister to Bhutan in August 2019. The implementation of Phase-I of RuPay cards in Bhutan has enabled visitors from India to access ATMs and Point of Sale (PoS) terminals across Bhutan.2Virtual Inauguration of ICP Biratnagar and witnessing the progress in Housing Reconstruction Project in Nepal January 21, 2020Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, along with Prime Minister of Nepal Shri K.P. Sharma Oli jointly inaugurated the second Integrated Check Post (ICP) at Jogbani – Biratnagar through virtual mode. Both Prime Ministers also witnessed through virtual mode the progress in Government of India assisted post-earthquake housing reconstruction projects in Nepal.ICP at Biratnagar would be facilitating mutual trade and people to people movement between India and Nepal. Out of GoI''s post-earthquake reconstruction commitment to build 50,000 houses in Gorkha and Nuwakot districts, 45,000 were completed by Jan 2020.</pre>(f) Several steps are being taken to enhance cooperation between India and Uzbekistan.  i. There have been frequent high level visits between the two countries. Since the visits of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi in 2015 and 2016 to Uzbekistan and those of President H.E. Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, in October 2018 and January 2019, Strategic partnership has risen to a new level.   ii. Both countries have institutionalized mechanisms of Foreign Office Consultations and Inter-Governmental Commission to periodically review and take measures to follow up on various issues pertaining to cooperation in all sectors.  iii. India and Uzbekistan have formed their respective National Committees for implementation of joint projects to review progress on implementation of joint projects.   iv. Joint Working Groups in IT, agriculture textiles, pharmaceuticals, healthcare, tourism, science & technology, space cooperation, counter-terrorism and defence have been constituted. Cooperation in these areas is being pursued under the oversight of these mechanisms.   v. On the business front, India-Uzbekistan Joint Business Forum has been established between the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and the Chamber of Commerce & Industry of Uzbekistan. Government has encouraged private sector companies from both sides to engage with each other.   vi. The institutional mechanism of the India-Central Asia Business Council has also been set up in January 2019, facilitating exchanges between Federation of Indian Industries (FICCI) and Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Uzbekistan along with business chambers from other Central Asian countries. FICCI has organised ‘Namaskar Eurasia’ in February 2021 bringing together exporters and importers from India and countries across Eurasia including Uzbekistan.   vii. In the field of Defence cooperation, mechanisms like - Joint Working Group (JWG) on Defence cooperation, deployment of Indian Military Training Team (IMTT), Joint Military Exercise (Dustlik) are in place.    viii. In the area of Development Partnership, an LoC agreement of USD 448 million for development projects was signed during the Virtual Summit in December 2020. Both sides are taking appropriate steps for the implementation of projects under this LoC.    ix. To enhance cultural and people to people ties, the Lal Bahadur Shastri Centre for Indian Culture (LBSCIC) run by ICCR is strengthening India-Uzbekistan cultural relations and imparting quality training in the fields of Indian classical dance, yoga, tabla and the teaching of Hindi in Uzbekistan. In October 2020, LBSCIC completed its 25 years of establishment in Uzbekistan.***
                                                    























HomeArchiveIndex to Select Questions (1984-1999)Ballot ListStatistical Statements Relating to QuestionsUploading of Questions - Status QueryProcedure for Sending Text of Questions & AnswersDemarcation of responsibilities in Govt. of IndiaBrochure on Statutory Corporations, Companies and Other Bodies in Which the Government of India have financial or controlling interestHighlights pertaining to questions of 17th Lok Sabha






Contact Us 
Disclaimer











        Developed and Hosted by National Informatics Centre (NIC)

Content on this website is published,
            managed & maintained by Software Unit, Computer (HW & SW) Management. Branch,
            Lok Sabha Secretariat





HomeMembersBusinessQuestionsDebatesPapers Laid


LegislationCommitteesSANSAD TVIntranetSecretariatPRIDE


RecruitmentSC/ST ReservationConferenceParliament Library


About ParliamentPhoto GalleryRelated LinksRTITendersFAQ


SpeakerDy. SpeakerLeader of the HousePanel of ChairpersonsContact UsFeedback


Council of MinistersPublications of MinistriesParliamentry ProceduresJournal of Parliamentary Information
Visitor's Counter:113212031







Copyright
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Terms &
                Conditions

                Accessibility Statement
Accessibility
                Options
Feedback
Site Map







