



	Questions : Lok Sabha




























Screen Reader Access
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Navigation



Text Size

                                A

                                A
A















हिन्दी मे








Parliament of India Lok Sabha House of the
                        People






* Special Characters not allowed












India Time 


Your Time 


                        Tuesday,
                        12 April 2022









HomeMembersSitting MembersMembers Home PageMembers' PortalContact DetailsMembers SearchStatistical AnalysisAttendance of MembersHandbook Members Since 1952Digitized Who's WhoOthers BusinessProvisional CalendarList of BusinessPapers to be LaidList of Private Members' BusinessBulletin-IDigitized Lok Sabha Bulletin Part IBulletin-IIStatement of WorkSpecial Mentions (ZERO HOUR)Resume of WorkDigitized Resume of Work done by Lok Sabha QuestionsHomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions DebatesIntroductionSynopsisUncorrected DebateText of DebateDigitized DebatesConstituent Assembly DebatesWit And HumourDebate SearchHindi FontsDisclaimer Papers LaidPapers Laid on the Table of the House LegislationIntroduction(How Bill Becomes Act)Bills IntroducedBills PassedBills PendingBills AssentedBills LapsedBills WithdrawnBills NegativedBills Search Disclaimer CommitteesIntroductionChairpersonSummary of WorkCommittee Meetings ScheduleBills Referred to CommitteesReports PresentedDigitized ReportsPress ReleaseMembership SearchToday's Committee MeetingsCommittee Subject SelectedDepartment Related-RS Govt. AssurancesSANSAD TVIntranet





HomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions











Download as PDF




Print












PDF/WORD(Hindi)


PDF/WORD




                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
                                





                                    MINISTRY OF
                                    PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS






                                    LOK SABHA
                                





UNSTARRED 


                                    QUESTION NO:
                                

3449






                                    ANSWERED ON: 
                                

17.12.2021






SAROD-Ports




Pinaki Misra














                        Will the Minister of





PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS


                        be pleased to state:-















                                                    (a) whether SAROD-Ports have been operationalised; (b) if so, the number of cases pending before the tribunal, port-wise and if not, estimated timeline for its implementation; (c) the number of arbitrators empanelled/proposed to be empanelled in the SAROD-Ports and the details of the empanelment process thereof; (d) the composition of the SAROD-Ports and number of representatives from Indian Ports Association and the Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association to be included in SAROD-Ports; and (e) the composition of the tribunal deciding the dispute?






ANSWER




                                                        (a) & (b) Yes, SAROD-Ports has been operationalised. SAROD-Ports has been registered in Delhi under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. A panel of Arbitrators has been prepared. SAROD-Ports is in a position to handle cases of disputes or differences between the Concessionaire and the Major Port Authorities as and when cases are referred to them. Currently, no case is pending with SAROD-Ports.(c) 32 (thirty two) Arbitrators have been empanelled in SAROD-Ports (Annexure - I). The Arbitrators are empanelled after inviting applications from persons from different fields like judicial/legal experience, retired or serving officers not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, retired   or  serving   heads  of  the   Government   Institutes   and  retired Chairperson/Deputy Chairperson of  a Major Port Authority and/or on the recommendations of the Search Committee for empanelment of eminent persons of high integrity having vast experience and knowledge in port or maritime sector.(d) The SAROD-Ports consists of 12 Members (6 Members from Indian Ports Association and 6 Members from Indian Private Ports and Terminals); and(e) The Tribunal (‘A Sole Arbitrator or all Arbitrators when more than one is appointed’, as defined in the Arbitration Rules of the SAROD-Ports) deciding the dispute shall have a Sole Arbitrator when the total claim and counterclaim (if any) as set out in the Notice of Arbitration and Response to Notice of Arbitration respectively is Rs.3 (three) crores and less. In all cases where the amount in dispute is more than Rs.3 (three) crores, the Tribunal shall consist of a three-member Tribunal to be nominated by the parties. The details of the Tribunal are contained in Rule 11 to 13 of the Arbitration Rules of the SAROD-Ports (Annexure - II). ANNEXURE – IList of Shortlisted Arbitrators of SAROD – Ports Sl. No<pre>	Name, Address,  email address & Phone Number	D.O.B	Qualifications	Last Post Held 1.		Sh. B. Seshasayana ReddyH.No.10-1-128/1/1, Rajasree Residency, 2nd Floor, Flat No.203, Masab Tank Hyderabad-500028Email: bssr1951@gmail.comMob: 9440621426	01.07. 1951	1. B.A.2. M.L.	Retired Judge, High Court of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.2.	Shri Ashok Kumar TripathiE-406, Parsvanath Prestige, Sector-93A Noida, Distt. Gautam Budh Nagar (U.P.)Mob:  09911566668/07042784387Email: atipathi@yahoo.co.in1.08.1952	1.	LLB 2.	B. Sc	-	Member Judicial, NCLT3.	Justice GrandhiBhavani PrasadDoor No.6-3-1219/24, Flat No.202, First Floor, Above Karnataka Bank Ltd., Ujwal Bhavishya Complex, Street No.4, Umanagar, Kundanbagh, Begumpet, HYDERABAD-500016.Email:sarala.grandhi@gmail.comMob : 9440621425 	09.04.1951	1.	B.Sc.2.	B.L.	-	Judge of High Court of Andhra Pradesh4.	Justice N.R.L.Nageshwara RaoHouse No. 12-19-24 Praksah Nagar Narasaraopet ,Guntur Dist AP -522601Email:jnrlnrj@gmail.com Mob:9959 3776 67	26.07.1951	1.B. Sc2.B.L	-High Court Judge 5.	Dr. Justice S.Vimala36 Prithvi Avenue, IB/IC  Coral Classic ApartmentAbiramapuran, Alwarpet ,Chennai-18Email: jusvimala57@gmail.com Mob: 9444 71 0101 	11.01.1957  	1.	B. Sc2.	ML3.	Ph.D	-	Judge of Madras High Court  6.	Sh.  Rakesh Kumar Agrawal A-15, Ground Floor, South Extension Part-II New Delhi-110049 Email ID: Rkagrawal1958@gmail.comMob: 7542030167Res: 011-43051553	20.09.1958	1. M. Tech(Applied Mechanics)2. B.E.(Civil)	- Engineer in Chief PWD, Delhi   7.	Sh. Mahesh Kumar GuptaB-4 , Sector 44 Noida, GautamBudh Nagar, UP-201 301Email: mkg_irse83@yahoo.co.inMob: 9899300900	 11.02.1960	1.	Section A and B. of the Institution of Engineers Examination in Civil Engineering Branch AMIE2.	LLB	-	Chief Engineer, (Construction), East Central Railway, Hazipur (Bihar).8.	Sh. Trivikram Nath TiwariFlat No. 301-B, Block No. 3-B, HIG DDA Flats, Rani Jhansi Road DDA Complex,  Motia–Khan, New Delhi – 110 055.Email:trivikramnt@yahoo.co.inMobile :  9871788277/9868472265	08.01.1956	-	B. Sc. (Honours) -	P.G. Diploma in Public Administration-	LLB-	Certificate in Labour Law 	-	Additional Secretary (Indian Legal Service),   Ministry of Law & Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, Government of India.9.	Sh. Virendra Kumar VermaFlat no. 1125 Prestige Ivy league, Hi Tech City Road, Beside Epark TCS, Kondapur Hyderabad,   500084 TelanganaEmail: vkverma83@rediffmail.com Mob: 770242282 	18.01.1960  	1.	B. Tech(Civil Engineering)2.	M. Tech in  Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering 	-	Chief Engineer, S.E. Railway 10.	Sh. Pradeep Kumar GuptaT 17 Green Park Extension, New Delhi 110016pradeepkgupta53@gmail.comMob: 9971491696 & 011-26191696	19.12.1951	1.	B. TECH (HONS) Civil  	-	Special Director General, C.P.W.D.  11.	Sh. Arvind Kumar AroraB-333, Chittaranjan Park, New Delhi 110019	Email:arvindarora2016@gmail.com  	Mob. : 8130588577 	10.01.1956	1.	B E Civil 2.	M Tech( Civil) 3.	M Phil ( Defence and Strategic Studies) 	-	Director General from Military Engineering Services 12.	Sh. Dinesh KumarTower No. 22/801 CWG Village Near Akshardham Temple NH 24 Delhi 110092Email: dineshkumar.cpwd@gmail.comMob: 9810718565/7827247042	23.01.1955	1.	B.E. Civil	-	Engineer in Chief Delhi, PWD/Special D.G. CPWD13.	Sh. Upendra MalikB – 108, NSG Society, plot number 2 pocket 6, Builders Area Greater Noida 201308 UPEmail: Upendra.malik@gmail.com Mob: 9891318773	02.04.1957	1.	B.E. Civil Engineering 	-	Special Director General, Central Public Works Department 14.	Sh. Babu Lal Choudhary C1/20, Pocket-4 Kendriya Vihar-2, Sector 82, Noida 201304, Gautam Budh Nager UPEmai.blc1952@gmail.comMob: 9958966916	25.12.1952	1.	B.Sc 2.	LLB3.	DPG in Laws (PGDLL) 4.	PGD in Human Resource Management 5.	PG Diploma in Industrial Relatins & Pesonnel Mangement 6.	PG Diploma in Labour Laws	-	Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser, Ministry of Law and Justice,Department of Legal Affairs.15.	Sh B. PoiyaamozhiD2/17, KendriyaVihar, Paruthipattu, Avadi – Poonamalli Road, Chennai-600071Email: b_poiyaamozhi@hotmail.comPoiyaamozhi@gmail.comMob: 9968688854	07.08.1956	1.	B.E. Civil Engineering 2.	M.E Urban Engineering 3.	PG Diploma Business Administration4.	Diploma of Membership Civil Engineering5.	Diploma of  membership as fellow in Technical  Arbitration 	-	Development Adviser (Ports), Ministry of Shipping 16.	Sh. Rusheekeswara Rao Akula82,“Anukampa” 2nd Main Road 8thcross, BDS Gardens, Geddalahalli, Hennur Road, Bangalore-560077Email: arraodap@yahoo.inMob:9810081473 		28.08.1949	1.	B.Sc (Engg)2.	PG(DBA)3.	Certificate in Fluvial transport4.	Certificate in Port Management Operations	-	Development Advisor (Ports) Ministry of Shipping.17.	Dr.  Lalit Varma IAS 1984 Batch, UP Cadre, A225, Shivalik, Malviya Nagar,	New Delhi 110017 Email: drlalitvarma@gmail.comMob: 9415338066	13.02.1962	1.	M.A.(Economics)2.	L.L.B	3.	P.G. diploma in Management4.	Ph.D. Economics, 	-	Additional Chief Secretary UP Government 18.	Sh. Manindra Chandra PandaDDA SFS No-151, Sector-22. Dwarka, New Delhi-110077manidra.panda@yahoo.comMobile No 9999008545	23-01-1949	1.	B. Sc Engg (Mech)2.	PG Diploma in Industrial Management3.	PG Diploma in Labour Law4.	MBA 	-	Additional Director General, DGS&D, (Additional Secretary), Ministryof Commerce, Govt. of India19.	Sh. Afzal Amanullah133,Patliputra Colony, Patna 800013Email ID : grooves133@gmail.comMob: 9868255133	14.05.1956	1. Master in Public Administration1.	Bachelor of Law 2.	MA Economics, 3.	BA (Hons) Economics	-	Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, New Delhi. 20.	Capt. Dhiren Kumar  MohantyPlot No.645Shaheed NagarBhubaneswar, Odhisha-751007Email:  kdhiren760@gmail.comMob:  9438337451	20.01.1955	1. B.A.2. Master Mariner	-	Chairman and Managing Director, Dredging Corporation of India Pvt. Ltd.21.	Sh. Rajesh Tripathi7 – P4 Radha Beach Residency , Beach Road, Maharani Peta,  Vishakhapatnam,  AP-530002Email:rajesh128@yahoo.com Mob: 9908118726, 8912563648	07.02.1961	-	M. Tech (STRs)-	B.E. (CIVIL) -	Diploma in Business Management	-	ED/Railway Board upto 01.02.2015.-	MD, Dredging Corporation of India.22.	Sh. M. A. BhaskaracharFlat no. 51, D6 Block KendriyaVihar, B.B.Road, Yelahanka, Bengaluru- 560064 Email:bhaskarachar@gmail.com Mob:9566093344	12-07-1957 	1.	B.Com 2.	FCME 3.	Certificate course on Arbitration, ICAI	-	Chairman and Managing Director, Kamarajar Port Ltd 23.	Sh. S NatarajanE -144, Embassy Residency Cheran Nagar, Perumbakkam, Chennai 600100Email: natarajandycpt@gmail.comMob: 9443389503	10.06.1958	-	M.Com-	AICWAI-	DMT -	CS,(Inter)	-	Deputy Chairman, Major Port Trusts24.	Sh. N. VaiyapuriNo.5B, Dr. M. VaradrajanSanjeevi Nagar Chennai-600106Emailnvpurippt@gmail.comMob: 9937411117	09.10.1959	1.	BE2.	MBA3.	Master Degree in Port Management and Harbour Administration	-	Deputy Chairman VOC  Port Trust.25.	Sh. G. SenthilvelDoor-12, Plot No.7 & 8,Bhavnandiar 6th Cross Street, SembakkamP.O.: Selaiyur,Chennai –600073Tamil NaduEmail: gsaisenthil@gmail.comMob:  9800078643	28.12.1959	1.M.Com2.MBA3.PG Diploma In labour Administration. 4.	Associate Member of Cost and Management Accounts of India	-	Deputy Chairman, Haldia Dock Complex, Kolkata Port Trust26.	Sh. Divya P. Sinha83, Lodi Estate, New Delhi 110003Email: dpsinha.ips @gmail.com  Mob:  9868264271   	26.09.1955	1. B.Sc (Hons.)	-	Secretary ( Security, Cabinet Secretariat). Retired Central Information Commission.27.	Sh. Subrahmonian Machendranathan , IASC-II/18, Bappa Nagar, New Delhi- 110003. Email: pksmnathan@gmail.comPhone No.: 23071125Mobile No.: 9560922339	07.03.1954	1. BBA2. MBA	-	 Chairman, VOC Port Trust.-	Secretary (Coordination), Cabinet Secretary.28.	Sh. A. BalasubramanianEmail: bala.a7@gmail.comMob: 9840299305		1. B. Com2. MBA3. Fellow – FCMA 4. LLB5. PG Diploma in Competition Law	-	Eminent Expert in the legal field and is financial / PPP Marine Adviser. 29.	Ms. Anuradha Bhatia, IRSEmail: anubhatia60@yahoo.comMob:   9892101485	26.08.1960	1.	LLB2.	M.A.3.	B.A.	Principal Chief Commissioner Income Tax, Mumbai. 30.	Sh. Gopal KrishnaD-52, Ground Floor, Saket, New Delhi – 110017.Email: gkrishna79@hotmail.com, gkrishna549@gmail.comMobile No: 9903254000, 8902755616	 14.04.1960	1. MBA2. M. Sc.3. B. Sc. (Hon.)	-	Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Shipping.31.	N. SivasailamMobile No: 9448990310	23.04.1960	1. BE (Mech. Engg.)2. MBA3. PG Diploma, IPR	-	Special Secretary (Logistics), Department of Commerce, Government of India.-	32.	Sh. Subash Chandra MohantyR1, Flat No. 303 Park View Appartment Hauz Khas, New Delhi - 110016Email: subashmohanty39@gmail.comMob: 7008118521/9861130358/9938504151   	10.12.1967	1. M.Com2. MBA3. LLB4. LLM5. e-Accountant and Taxation Management6. MDP on Computerized accounting and Tally7. Certificate on Stock Broking  	-	Eminent Expert in the legal field and associated with Paradeep Port Trust and other Government Agencies.                                                             </pre>ANNEXURE - IIARBITRATION RULES OF THE SOCIETY FOR AFFORDABLE REDRESSAL OF DISPUTES - PORTS (SAROD-PORTS) ARBITRATION RULES OF SAROD-PORTSINDEXRule 1.	Scope of Application2.	Definitions3.	Notice, Calculation of Periods of Time4.	Commencement of Arbitration5.	Response by Respondent6.	Filing of Case Statements7.	Contents of Case Statements8.	Default in Filing and Serving Case Statements9.	Further Written Statements10.	SAROD-Ports to Provide Assistance11.	Appointment of Tribunal12.	Multi-party Appointment of the Tribunal13.	Appointment of Substitute Arbitrator14.	Independence and Impartiality of the Tribunal15.	Code of Ethics for Arbitrators16.	Challenge of Arbitrators 17.	Decision on Challenge18.	Removal of the Tribunal19.	Re-hearing in the Event of Replacement of the Tribunal20.	Jurisdiction of the Tribunal21.	Fees of SAROD-Ports and Arbitral Tribunal22.	Transmission of File of the Tribunal23.	Juridical Seat of Arbitration24.	Language of Arbitration25.	Conduct of the Proceeding26.	Communications between Parties and the Tribunal27.	Party Representatives28.	Hearings29.	Documents - only Arbitration30.	Witnesses31.	Experts Appointed by the Tribunal32.	Rules applicable to substance of dispute33.	Closure of Hearings34.	Additional Powers of the Tribunal35.	Deposits to Costs and Expenses36.	Decision Making by the Tribunal37.	The Award38.	Additional Award39.	Correction of Award40.	Settlement41.	Interest 42.	Costs43.	Waiver44.	Exclusion of Liability45.	General Provisions46.	Amendment to RulesPREAMBLEIn order to seek speedy, affordable, just and reasonable Redressal ofDispute/Differences between Major Port Trusts andConcessionaire/Contractor arising out of and during the course of execution ofvarious contracts, a Society for Affordable Resolution of Disputes - Ports (SAROD-Ports) has been formed under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 withregistration no. S-E/1715/Distt. South East/2020 dated 30th January, 2020.  It has been formed by Indian Ports Association and Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association with founding members as mentioned in the Memorandum of Association ofSAROD-Ports. SAROD-PORTS ARBITRATION RULESRule 1- Scope of Application1.1	Where  any  agreement,  submission  or  reference   provides   for   arbitration at  the Society  for   Affordable   Resolution   of   Disputes - Ports   ("SAROD-Ports"), or under the Arbitration Rules of the SAROD-Ports and where the  case  is  a  domestic  arbitration,  the  same  shall  be  conducted  in  accordance   with   the following Rules, or such Rules as amended by the SAROD-Ports where the amendments take effect before the commencement of the Arbitration	1.2	These rules shall come into effect from the day of approval by Governing Body ofSAROD-Ports.Rule 2 – Definitions2.1	These Rules shall be referred to as ''''the SAROD-Ports ArbitrationRules".2.2	In theseRules:"Act" means the ''Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996'' of India and any statutory modifications or re-enactments thereof “Domestic Arbitration” means anarbitration other than an international commercial arbitration as defined under the Act. "E-Arbitration" means submission of pleadings, defence statement etc. by E-mail and holding of proceedings via video conferencing."Governing Body" means Governing Body of SAROD-Ports as defined in Article 4 of Memorandum of Association.“IPA” means Indian Ports Association."IPPTA" means Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association“Party" means a party to an arbitration agreement."President" means President of Governing Body of SAROD-Ports as defined in Rules & Regulation of SAROD-Ports."SAROD-Ports" means the Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes- Ports."SAROD-Ports Arbitrator Panel" means the list of persons admitted to serve as Arbitrators under these Rules. “Secretary" means Secretary of SAROD-Ports as defined in Rules & Regulation of SAROD-Ports."Tribunal" means either a Sole Arbitrator or all Arbitrators when more than one is appointed.Rule 3 - Notice, Calculation of periods of Time3.1	All communications including notice, communication, or proposal, shall be in writing (“written communication”). Any such written communication is deemed to have been received if it is delivered to the addressee personally, or by post at his -(a) place of business, (b) habitual residence, or (c)mailing address, or by any form of electronic communication (including electronic mail or facsimile) which provides a record of its transmission or in any other manner as may be ordered by the Tribunal. 3.2	For the purposes of calculating a period of time under these Rules,such period shall begin to run on the day following the day when a notice, notification, communication or proposal is received. If the last day of  such period  is  an official holiday or a non-business day at  the  residence  or  place  of  business  of the addressee, the period is extended  until  the  first  business  day  which  follows.  Gazetted public holidays or non-business days occurring during the running of the period of time are included in calculating the period.3.3	The transmission is deemed to have been received on the day oftransmission.3.4	The parties shall file with the Secretary, a copy of any written communication concerned arbitration proceedings.Rule 4- Commencement of Arbitration4.1	Any party wishing to commence an arbitration under these Rules ("the Claimant") shall file with  the  Secretary and  serve  on the other  party  {"the  Respondent"),  a written Notice of Arbitration (''''the Notice of Arbitration") which  shall  include  the following:a.	a request that the dispute be referred to arbitration;b.	the names, addresses, telephone numbers, fax numbers and email addresses of the parties to the dispute;c.	a reference to the arbitration clause or any separate arbitration agreement that is invoked and provide a copy of the arbitration clause or arbitrationagreement;d.	a reference to the contract out of which the dispute arises and provide a copy of the contract wherepossible;e.	a brief statement describing the nature, facts and circumstances leading to the dispute;f.	the relief or remedy sought, including the amount of claim if quantifiable at the time the Notice or Arbitration isfiled;g.	a proposal as to the number of Arbitrators (i.e. one or three), if the parties have not previously agreed on the number;andh.	The name of the proposed sole Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports, or in case of a three member Tribunal , the name of its nominee Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports4.2	A filing fee of Rs. 10,000/- (Ten Thousand rupees) or any amount decided by Governing Body from time to time is payable at the time of filing the Notice of arbitration.4.3	The date of receipt of complete notice of Arbitration including the requisite filing fees with the Secretary is the date of commencement of the arbitration for the purpose of the SAROD-Ports arbitration rules. 4.4	For the avoidance of doubt, the Notice of Arbitration is deemed to be complete when all the requirements of Rule 4.1 have been fulfilled or when the Secretary determines that there has been substantial compliance with the requirements.Rule 5 - Response by Respondent5.1	Within 14 (fourteen) days of receipt of the Notice of Arbitration, the Respondent shallfilewiththeSecretaryandserveuponontheClaimant,aResponseincludinga.	A confirmation or denial of all or part of theclaims;b.	Brief statement ofthe nature and circumstances of any envisaged counterclaimsc.	A comment in response to any proposals contained in the Notice of Arbitration; d.	The name of the respondent''s nominatedArbitrator.e.	Statement specifying the relief claimed, including the amounts of quantified counterclaims, if any, and if such counterclaims are quantifiable at the time the Response to Notice of Arbitration is filed;f.	Either a confirmation to the name of the sole Arbitrator proposed by the Claimant or in case of disagreement, propose the name of the sole Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports. In case of a three member Tribunal, the name of the nominee Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports will be proposed by the claimant as well as by the respondent. In such situations, the appointment of the sole Arbitrator or the Tribunal shall be as per the provisions of Rule 11.3.  g.	the names and contact details of the Respondent, and its legal representatives (if any), (including  postal addresses, telephone numbers, fax numbers, and email addresses, if available); 5.2	A filing fee of Rs. 10,000/- (Ten thousand rupees) or any amount decided by Governing Body from time to time is payable at the time of filing theResponse.5.3	In case parties have objection to the jurisdiction of Arbitral Tribunal, such objectionshallberaised at the earliest as per the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.Rule 6- Filing of Case Statements6.1	Within 30 (thirty) days after the filing of the Notice of Arbitration, the claimant must file with the Secretary and serve on the Respondent,  a Statement  of  Claimant''s Case alongwith all documents to be relied upon by theClaimant.6.2	Within   30  (thirty)  days   after   the   service   of   the   statement   of    Claimant''s Case, the Respondent must file with the Secretary and serve on the Claimant, a statement of respondent''s defence  and counterclaim  (if any)  alongwith  all  documents to be relied upon by theRespondent.6.3	Within 30 (thirty) days after the service of the statement of Respondent''s defence, if  the  Claimant   intends  to   challenge   anything in the  statement  of   Respondent''s defence and/or counterclaim, the Claimant must then file with the Secretary and serve on  the Respondent, astatement of     claimant''s     reply     and    if     necessary, defence to counterclaim.6.4	No further case statements may be filed without the leave of the Tribunal or if a Tribunal has not been appointed, the Secretary.6.5	The Tribunal or if a Tribunal has not been appointed, the Secretary, may upon the written application of a party, extend the time limits provided under thisRule.6.6	The party required to file a case statement must at the same time deposit with the Secretary for eventual transmission to the Tribunal an additional copy or additional copies of the case statement, according to the number of Arbitrators constituting or who will constitute theTribunal.Rule 7 - Contents of Case Statements7.1	The case statements must contain the detailed particulars of the party''s claim, defence or counterclaim and must thus contain a comprehensive statement of the facts and contentions of law supporting the party''sposition.7.2	Itmust:a.	Set out all items of relief or other remedies sought together with the amount of all quantifiable claims and detailedcalculations.b.	State fully its reasons for denying any allegation or statement of the other party. State fully its own version of events if a party intends to put forward a version of events different from that given by the other party.7.3	A case statement must be signed by or on behalf of the party makingit.Rule 8 - Default in Filing and Serving Case Statements8.1	If the Claimant fails within the time specified under these Rules or as may be fixed by the Tribunal or by the Secretary, to submit its Statement of Case, the Tribunal or if a Tribunal has not been appointed, the Governing Body may issue an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings ormake such other directions as may be appropriate in thecircumstances.8.2	If the Respondent fails to submit a Statement of Respondent''s Defence, the Tribunal may nevertheless proceed with the arbitration and make theaward.Rule 9 - Further Written Statements9.1	The Tribunal will decide  which  further  written  statements,  in  addition  to  the case statement(s) already filed,  are  required  from  the  parties  and  shall  fix  the periods of time for giving, filing and serving suchstatements.9.2	All such further statements must be given to the Tribunal, filed with the Secretary and served on the Claimant or Respondent, whichever isapplicable.Rule 10 - SAROD-Ports to Provide Assistance10.1	At the request of the Tribunal or either party, the Secretary will render such assistance as is required for the conduct of the arbitration, including arranging for facilities, suitable accommodation for sittings of the Tribunal, secretarial assistance or interpretation of theserules.10.2	Any additional expenses incurred or to be incurred for any such arrangements shall be borne by the parties.Rule 11- Appointment of Tribunal11.1	The disputes shall be decided by a Sole Arbitrator when the total claim and counterclaim (if any) as set out in the Notice of Arbitration and Response to Notice of Arbitration respectively is Rs.3 (three) crores or less. 11.2	In all cases where amount in dispute is more than Rs.3 (three) crores, the Tribunal shall consist of a three-member Tribunal to be nominated by the parties. 11.3	Where the dispute is to be decided by a sole Arbitrator, both parties shall mutually appoint a sole Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports, within 15 (fifteen) days from the date of the Notice of Arbitration. If the parties fail to agree on the appointment of Arbitrator within 15 (fifteen) days from the receipt of a request by one party from the other party, the appointment shall be made upon request of a party, by the Governing Body from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports. The Governing Body shall consider the nature of the dispute as set out in the Notice of Arbitration, and the response to the Notice of Arbitration (if filed), prior to appointment of the sole Arbitrator. a)	Where the dispute is to be decided by a Tribunal comprising of three Arbitrators, each party shall appoint one Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports, and the two appointed Arbitrators shall appoint the third Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports, who shall act as the Presiding Arbitrator. In an arbitration by a three member Tribunal, if (i) a party fails to appoint an Arbitrator within 15 (fifteen) days from the receipt of request from one party to do so, or (ii) if the two appointed Arbitrators fail to agree on the appointment of third Arbitrator within 15 (fifteen) days from the date of their appointment, then the appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator shall be made, upon the request of a party by the Governing Body of SAROD-Ports from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports. b)	The eligibility criteria for empanelment of Arbitrators will be decided by the Governing Body. 11.4	An Arbitrator/Presiding Arbitrator to be appointed under these Rules shall be a person on the SAROD-Ports Arbitration Panel as at the date of theappointment.11.5	In the event of any party failing to appoint Arbitrator within 30 days of receipt of the notice of Arbitration, the Governing Body shall appoint the Arbitrator or Presiding Arbitrator as the case may be.Rule 12- Multiparty appointment of the Tribunal12.1	In an arbitration where there are more than two parties to the arbitration and a sole Arbitrator is to be appointed in terms of Rule 11.1, the parties may agree to jointly nominate the sole Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports. In the absence of such joint nomination having been made within 30 days of the date of Notice of Arbitration, the Governing Body shall appoint the sole Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports. 12.2	In an arbitration where there are more than two parties to the arbitration, and three Arbitrators are to be appointed, the Claimant(s) shall jointly nominate one Arbitrator and the Respondent(s) shall jointly nominate one Arbitrator, from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports, and the two appointed Arbitrators shall appoint the third Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports, who shall act as the presiding Arbitrator.  If (i) a party [i.e. the Claimant (s) or Respondent (s), as the case may be], fails to appoint an Arbitrator within thirty days from the receipt of request from one party to do so, or (ii) if the two appointed Arbitrators fail to agree on the third Arbitrator within thirty days from the date of their appointment, then the appointment shall be made by the Governing Body of SAROD-Ports from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by SAROD-Ports.Rule 13-Appointment of Substitute ArbitratorIn the event of the death or resignation of any of the Arbitrators or if the Arbitrator withdraws from his office for any reason or by or pursuant to agreement of the parties, or if the Arbitrator becomes de jure or de facto unable to perform his functions or for other reasons fail to act without any undue delay, a substitute Arbitrator must beappointedbythesameprocedureas inRule  11bywhichtheArbitratorconcerned was appointed, failing which, the Governing Body  will  make  the appointment.Rule 14 - Independence and Impartiality of the Tribunal14.1	The Tribunal conducting arbitration under these Rules shall be and remain at all times independent and impartial, and shall not act as advocate for anyparty.14.2	A prospective Arbitrator shall disclose to those who approach him inconnection with his possible appointment, any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality orindependence.14.3	An Arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout arbitral proceedings, shall without delay, disclose to the Secretary and the parties in writing circumstances referred in 14.2 unless they have already been informed of them by him. Rule 15 - Code of Ethics for ArbitratorsAnArbitrator isafountain of justiceandemblemof equity,fairness andgood conscience. Therefore he/she is expected to exhibit a noble conduct. The code of conduct prescribed by the Governing Body has to beadopted.Appointment15.1 A prospective  Arbitrator  shall accept  an appointment  only if he is fully satisfied  that he is able to discharge his duties without bias, he has an adequate knowledge of the language of the arbitration, and he is able to give to the arbitration  the time  and  attention which the parties are reasonably entitled toexpect,15.2	In this code, the masculine includes thefeminine.Disclosure15.3	A prospective Arbitrator shall disclose all facts or circumstances thatmay give rise to justifiable doubts as to hisimpartiality or independence, such duty to continue thorough out the arbitral proceedings with regard to new facts and circumstances, in terms of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 as amended from time totime.15.4	A prospective Arbitrator shall disclose to the Secretary and any partywho approaches him for a possibleappointment:(a)	Any past or present close personal relationship or  business  relationship,  whether direct or  indirect,  with any party to the dispute,  or any representative of a  party, or any person known to be a potentially important witness in thearbitration;(b)	The extent of any prior knowledge he may have of thedispute.Bias15.5	The criteria for assessing questions relating to bias are impartiality and independence.Partiality arises when an Arbitrator favour one of the parties or where he is prejudiced in relation to the subject matter of the dispute.  Dependence arises fromrelationships between	anArbitrator and one oftheparties,	or with someone closely connected with one of theparties.15.6	Any closepersonalrelationship or current direct or indirect business relationship between an Arbitrator and a party, or any representative of a party, or with a person who   is   known   to   bea potentially important witness, will normally give rise to justifiable doubts as to a prospective Arbitrator''s impartiality or independence. Past business   relationships   will   only   give   risetojustifiable	doubts if they are of such magnitude or nature as to be likely to affect a prospective Arbitrator''s judgment.  He should   decline   to   acceptanappointment in such circumstances unless the parties agree in writing that he mayproceed.Communications15.7 	Before accepting an appointment, an Arbitrator may only enquire as to the general nature of the dispute, the names of the parties and the expected time period required for thearbitration.15.8	No Arbitrator shall communicatewith any of the parties or their Counsel until after the Secretary gives notice of the formation of the Tribunal to theparties.15.9	Throughout the arbitral proceedings, an Arbitrator shall avoid anyunilateral communications regarding the case with any party, or itsrepresentatives.Fees15.10	In accepting an appointment, an Arbitrator agrees to the remuneration as prescribed in the Schedule to the rules of SAROD-Ports, and he shall make no unilateral arrangements with any of the parties or their Counsel for any additional fees or expenses without the agreement of all the parties and the consent of the Secretary of SAROD-Ports.Conduct15.11	Once the arbitration proceedings commence, the Arbitrator shall acquaint himselfwith all the facts and arguments presented and all discussions relative to the proceedings so that he may properly understand thedispute.Confidentiality15.12	The arbitration proceedings	shallremain confidential. An Arbitrator is in a relationship of trust to the parties and should not, at any time,use confidential information acquired during the course of the proceedings to gain personal advantage or advantage for others, or to affect adversely the interest ofanother.15.13	This Code is not intended to provide grounds for the setting aside of any award.Rule 16- Challenge of Arbitrators16.1	An  Arbitrator   may  be  challenged   if  there  arecircumstancesthat give rise to justifiable  doubts  as to  his impartiality or independence  and also  if he or she has committed anymisconduct.16.2	An Arbitrator may alsobe challenged if he does not possessthe qualifications required by the agreement of theparties.16.3	A party may challengeanArbitrator appointed on its nominationor with its agreement only for reasons of which it becomes aware after the appointment has beenmade.16.4	A party who intends to challenge an Arbitrator shall file with the Secretary and serve on the other party or all otherparties,whichever is applicable, a Notice of challenge.16.5	The Notice of challenge must be filed andservedwithin 14 days from the appointment of the Arbitrator or within 14 days after the circumstances mentioned in Rule 15.1 became known to thatparty.16.6	The Notice of challenge must state the reasons for thechallenge.16.7	The arbitration shall be suspended until the challenge is resolved ordecided upon.16.8	When an Arbitrator has been challenged by one party, the other party may agree to the challenge. The Arbitrator may also, after the challenge, withdraw from his office. However, it is not implied in either case that there has been an acceptance of the validity of the grounds for the challenge. In both cases, the procedure provided in Rule 11 read with Rule 13, shall be used for the appointment of a substitute Arbitrator.Rule 17 - Decision on Challenge17.1	If the other party does not agree to the challenge and the Arbitrator does not withdraw, the decision on the challenge will be made by the GoverningBody.17.2	If the Governing Body sustains the challenge, a substituteArbitrator shall be appointed or chosen pursuant to the procedure applicable to the appointment of an Arbitrator as provided in Rule 11 read with Rule 13. If the Governing Body dismisses the challenge, the Arbitrator shall continue with thearbitration.Rule 18 - Removal of theTribunal18.1	The Governing Body may on the application of a party remove anArbitrator:a.	Who is physically or mentally incapable of conducting the proceedings or where there are justifiable doubts as to his ability to do so;orb.	Who has refused or failed to use all reasonable dispatch in conducting the arbitration or making anaward.c.	Who has continuously absented from attending the proceedings for more than three sittings without prior permission of the Presiding Arbitrator/Governing Body of SAROD- Ports.18.2	An Arbitrator may also be removed where complaints are received or on the Governing Body’s own initiative when it decides that the arbitrator is prevented de jure or de facto from the fulfilling the arbitrator’s functions, or that the particular arbitrator is not fulfilling the functions in accordance with the Rules or within the prescribed time limits. 18.3	Where applications or complaints are received against an Arbitrator for removal, there shall be a committee consisting of at least three members of the Governing Body to examine the same and make a recommendation to the Governing Body within 10 days from the date of receipt of the application or complaint as to what appropriate action may be taken against the concerned arbitrator. 18.4	The committee shall afford an opportunity of hearing to the Arbitrator(s) concerned before making any recommendation in the matter.18.5	The Governing Body, if deems fit may afford an opportunity of hearing to the concerned arbitrator before taking a decision on the recommendation of the committee. 18.6	Upon the removal of the Arbitrator, a substitute Arbitrator shall be appointed in accordance with Rule 11 read with Rule13.18.7	The Governing Body''s decision on the application is final and is not subject to appeal orreview.Rule 19 - Re-hearing in the Event of Replacement of the Tribunal19.1	Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where an Arbitrator is replaced under rule 18, any hearings previously held may be repeated at the discretion of the Arbitral Tribunal.19.2 Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an order or ruling of the arbitral Tribunal made prior to the replacement of a Arbitrator under rule 18 shall not be invalid solely because there has been a change in the composition of the Arbitral Tribunal.Rule 20 - Jurisdiction of the Tribunal20.1	The Tribunal shall have the power to rule on its own jurisdiction,including any objection with respect to the existence, termination or validity of the arbitration agreement. For that purpose,  an  arbitration  agreement  which  forms  part  of a  contract shall be treated as an agreement independent of the other terms  of the  contract. A decision by the Tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitrationagreement.20.2	The plea that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than in the Statement of Defence. A plea that the Tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority shall be raised promptly after the Tribunal has indicated its intention to decide on the matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority. In either case the Tribunal may nevertheless admit a late plea under this Rule if it considers the delay justified. A party is not precluded from raising such a plea by the fact that he has nominated, or participated in the appointment of anArbitrator.20.3	The Tribunal shall rule on an objection that it lacks jurisdiction as a preliminary question upon the objection being raised.  It  may  rule  on  an  objection  that  it  exceeds the scope of its authority either as a preliminary  question  or  in an award on  the merits, as it deems just andconvenient.20.4	In addition to the jurisdiction to exercise the powers defined  elsewhere  in  these Rules, the Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to determine any question of law arising in  the  arbitration;  proceed  with  the  arbitration  notwithstandingthe  failure   or refusal of any party to comply with these Rules or with the Tribunal''s  orders  or directions, or to  attend  any meeting  or  hearing,  but  only after  giving  that  party written notice that it intends to do so; and to receive and take  into account  such written or oral evidence as it shall determine to be relevant, whether or not strictly admissible in law.20.5	The arbitral Tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in 20.2 and where the arbitral Tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.Rule 21 - Fees of SAROD-Ports and Arbitral Tribunal Registration Fee (Non - Refundable): Rs.10,000/-  (Ten thousand rupees) or  any  amount  fixed  by  Governing Body from time to time. Arbitral Tribunal FeesThe Arbitral Tribunal fees and other miscellaneous expenses shall be as per the Schedule to these rules as decided by the GoverningBody from time to time. Rule 22- Transmission of File to the Tribunal22.1	The Secretary shall, as soon as practicable transmit to the Tribunal, a file containing the Notice of Arbitration, the Response and all casestatements.22.2	The Tribunal shall as soon as practicable, after consultation with the parties, issue such orders and/or directions as are necessary for the conduct of the arbitration to conclusion, including a timetable for steps to be taken in the arbitration and for the hearing of thearbitration.Rule 23- Judicial Seat of Arbitration23.1	Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the judicial seat of arbitration shall be New Delhi.23.2	Notwithstanding Rule 23.1, the Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, hold hearings and meetings anywhere convenient, subject to the provisions of Rule28.2.Rule 24 - Language of Arbitrationa.	The language to be used in the arbitration shall be English. b.	If a party submits any document in any language other than English, the party submitting such a document also has to submit before the Tribunal a translation of the said document to the English language.Rule 25 - Conduct of the ProceedingsThe Tribunal shall have the widest discretion allowed by the Act to ensure just, expeditious, economical and final determination of the dispute.   As far as practicable, the proceedings shall be conducted between 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. with a recess of one hour. Rule 26 - Communication between Parties and the Tribunal26.1	Where the Tribunal sends any written communication to one party, it shall send a copy to the other party or parties as the case maybe.26.2	Where a party sends any written communication (including Statements, expert reports or evidentiary documents) to the Tribunal, the same shall be copied to the other party or ail other parties, whichever is applicable, and show to the Tribunal that the same has been socopied.26.3	The address of the parties for the purpose of all communications during the proceedings shall be those set out in the Notice of Arbitration, or as either party may at any time notify the Tribunal and the other party or parties, whichever isapplicable.26.4	A copy of correspondence between the parties and the Tribunal shall be sent to theSecretary.Rule 27 – Party RepresentativesAny party may be represented by legal practitioners or any other representatives, subject to such proof of authority as the Tribunal may require. The names and addresses of such representatives must be notified to the other party or parties. Rule 28 – Hearings28.1	Unless the parties have agreed on documents- only arbitration the Tribunal shall hold a hearing for the presentation of evidence by witnesses, including expert witnesses, or for ora submissions.28.2	The Tribunal shall fix the date, time and place of any meetings and hearings in the arbitrations on the first hearing, and complete time table pertaining to all the activities of the Arbitration e.g. submission of statement of claim, reply, counter claim,  reply  therein, admission and denial of documents, visit/inspection of site if any. The Tribunal shall stick to the time table without any deviations unless there are unavoidable circumstances warranting such deviation which will be with the prior permission of theTribunal.28.3	Prior to the hearing, the Tribunal may provide the Parties with matters or questions to which it wishes them to give special consideration.28.4	In the event that a party to the proceedings without sufficient cause, fails to appear at a hearing of which the notice has been given, the Tribunal may proceed with the arbitration and may make the Award after the party present has submitted evidence to prove its case.28.5	All meetings and hearing shall be in private unless the parties agree otherwise.Rule 29 - Documents Only Arbitration29.1	Parties, may, at any stage before the constitution of the Tribunal or at any stage thereafter but before the evidence stage, mutually agree in writing to have their disputes resolved only through written pleadings, documents and submissions filed by the parties and without an oral hearing. 29.2	Where the parties agree to dispense with oral hearing, the Tribunal must be promptly informed by both the parties in writing as soon as possible. 29.3 Parties may seek discovery of documents if they are not satisfied with existence of documents annexed  with statement of claim, reply and counter claim by giving self-contained request to the Tribunal justifying the necessity for such documents. Decision of Tribunal shall be final and binding upon the parties.29.4	The Tribunal shall have the power to call for any further information or clarification from the parties in addition to the pleadings and documents filed by them.Rule 30 – Witnesses30.1	The Tribunal may require each party to give notice of the names and designations of the witnesses it intends to call and reasons for legal necessity of such witness.30.2	No party shall call any expert witness without the leave of the Tribunal.30.3	Any witness   who   gives   evidence   may   be   questioned   by   each   party   or its representative subject to any rulings made by the Tribunals. 30.4	A Witness may be required by the Tribunal to testify under oath or affirmation.30.5	Subject to such order or  direction  which  the  Tribunal  may  make,  the  testimony of witness may be  presented  in  written  form,  either  as  signed statements or by duly sworn or affirmed affidavits.30.6	Any party may require a witness to attend an oral examination at a hearing.  If the witness fails to attend, the Tribunal may  place  such  weight  on  the  written testimony as it thinks fit, or may exclude it altogether,30.7	The Tribunal shall determine the admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of the evidence given by any witness.Rule 31- Experts Appointed by the Tribunal31.1	Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the Tribunal may:a.	appoint one or more experts to report the Tribunal on specific issues;b.	require a  party  to  give  any  such  expert  any  relevant  information  or to produce, or  to  provide  access  to,  any  relevant   documents,   goods   or  property   for inspection by the expert.31.2	An expert appointed under Rule 31.1 above shall submit a report in writing to the Tribunal. Upon receipt of such written report, the Tribunal shall deliver a copy of the report to each of the parties and invite the parties to submit written comment on the report. 31.3	Rule 30.2 shall not apply to an assessor appointed by agreement ofthe parties, or to an expert appointed by the Tribunal to advise solely in relation to procedural matters.Rule	32- Rules	applicable to substance of dispute where the place	of arbitration is situated in IndiaIn an arbitration, the   arbitral   Tribunal    shall   decide   the   dispute submitted to arbitration in accordance with the substantive law for the time being in force in India;Rule 33 - Closure of Hearing33.1	The Tribunal may inquire of the parties if they have any further proof to offer or witnesses to behead or submissiontomake and,ifthere are none, declare the hearingclosed.33.2	The Tribunal may also, in view of exceptional circumstance, reopen the hearings at any time before the award ismade.Rule 34 - Additional Powers of the Tribunal34.1	In addition to the powers conferred by the Act, the Tribunal shall also have the powerto:-a.	Allow any party, upon such terms of as to costs and otherwise) as it shalldetermine, to amend claims orcounterclaims;b.	Extend or abbreviate any time limits provided by theseRules;c.	Conductsuch enquires	as may appear	to the Tribunal to be necessaryor expedient;d.	Order the parties to make any property or thing available forinspectione.	Order any parties to produce to the Tribunal, and to other partiesfor inspection, and to supply copies of any documents, or classes of documents in their possession, custody, or power which the Tribunal determines to relevant.f.	Make orders or give directions to any party forinterrogatories;g.	Make orders or give directions to any party for an interim injunction or anyother interimmeasure;h.	Make such orders or give such directions as it deems fit in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Act or any statutory re-enactment thereof or such law which is applicable or theseRules.34.2	If the parties so agree, the Tribunal shall also have the power to add other parties (with their consent) to be joined in the arbitration and make a single FinalAward determining all disputes betweenthem.Rule 35- Deposits of Costs and Expenses35.1	The Arbitral Tribunal’s fees and SAROD-Ports administration fees shall be ascertained in accordance with the schedule of fees in force at the time of commencement of thearbitration.35.2	The claimant shall deposit with SAROD-Ports half of the fees payable by it for the arbitration at the time of filing of the statement of claim.  The respondent shall deposit with the SAROD-Ports the half of the fees payable by it for the arbitration at the time of filing the Statement of respondent''s defence and counterclaim (if any). The balance fees payable shall be paid 60 (Sixty) days before the date of the final hearing or on such other date as the Secretary may direct.35.3	Where the amount of the claim or the counterclaim is not quantifiable at the time payment is due, the Secretary shall make a provisional estimate.  The fees will be adjusted in the light of such information as may subsequently become available.35.4	If the arbitration is settled or disposed of without a hearing, the amount of the Tribunal''s fees and SAROD-Ports administration fees shall be finally determined by the Secretary who will have regard to all the circumstances of the case, including the stage of proceedings at which the arbitration is settled or otherwise disposed of.35.5	The Secretary may from time to time direct parties to make one or more deposit(s) towards any further expenses incurred or to be incurred on behalf of or for the benefit of the parties.35.6	All deposit(s) shall be made to and held by the SAROD-PORTS.  Any interest which may accrue on such deposit(s) shall be retained by the SAROD-Ports.35.7	If a party fails to make the payments or deposits required or directed, the Tribunal may refuse to hear the claims or counterclaims, whichever is applicable, by the non-complying party, and it may proceed to determine claims or counterclaims by any party who has complied with orders.35.8	The parties shall remain jointly and severally liable to the SAROD-Ports for payment of all such fees and expenses until they have been paid in full even if the arbitration is abandoned, suspended or concluded, by agreement or otherwise, before the final Award is made.Rule 36 - Decision Making by the Tribunal36.1	Where a Tribunal has been appointed, any direction, order, decision oraward of the Tribunal must be made by the whole Tribunal or a majority. If an Arbitratorrefuses or fails to  sign  the  Award,  the  signatures  of the  majority  shall  be  sufficient, provided that the reason for the omitted signature isstated.36.2	If there is no unanimity, the same shall be made by the majority Arbitrators as well as by the dissenting Arbitrator alone as if acting as a soleArbitrator.36.3	However, in case of a three-member Tribunal the presiding Arbitratormay after consulting the other Arbitrators, make procedural rulingsalone.Rule 37 - The Award37.1	It will be mandatory for the parties to submit written synopsis of their arguments respectively which will form part of the arbitralproceedings.37.2	Unless the Secretary extends the time or the parties agree otherwise, the Tribunal shall make its Award in writingwithin30 days from the date on which the hearings are closed and shall state the reasons upon which its award is based. The award shall contain the date and shall be signed by the Arbitrator orArbitrators.37.3	The Tribunal may make interim awards or separate awards on different issues at differenttimes.37.4	All Awards must be submitted by the Tribunal to the Secretary and they shall be issued through theSecretary.37.5	The Tribunal must deliver to the Secretary numberoforiginals	of the award sufficient for the parties and for filing with theSecretary.37.6	The Secretary shall release the award to the parties only upon receipt of sufficient deposits to cover the fees and expenses due to the Tribunal and to the SAROD- PORTS.37.7	By agreeing to have arbitration under these Rules, the parties undertaketo carry out the award withoutdelay.37.8	Stamp duty on award shall be payable by the party in whose favor theaward has beenpronounced.Rule 38- Additional Award38.1	Within 30 days after the receipt of the award, either party, withnotice to the Secretary and the other party may request the Tribunal to make an additional award as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings but omitted from theaward.38.2	If the  Tribunal  considers  the  request  for an additional  award  to  be justified and considers  that  the  omission  can be rectified	without any further	hearing or evidence, it shall notify all the parties within 7 days of the receipt of the request, that it will make and additional award, and complete the additional award within 30 days after the receipt of therequest.Rule 39 - Correction of Awards39.1	Within 30 days of receiving an Award, unless another period of time has been agreed upon by the parties, a party may by notice to the Secretary and the other party request the Tribunal to correct in the Award, any errors in computation, any clerical or typographical errors or any errors of similarnature.39.2	If the Tribunal considers the request to be justified, it shallmakethe corrections within 30 days of receiving the request. Any correction shall be notified in writing to the parties and shall become part of theAward.39.3	The Tribunal may correct any error of the type referred to in Rule 39.1 on its own initiative within 30 days of the date of theAward.Rule 40- Settlement40.1	If, the parties arrived at amicable settlement of the dispute   during   the currency proceedings, the parties shall file memo of settlement before the Tribunal who shall either issue an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings or, if requested by both parties and accepted by the Tribunal, record the settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms. The Tribunal is not obliged to give reasons for such an award,40.2	The Parties shall:a.	NotifytheTribunal	and the  Secretary  immediately ifthearbitration	is settled or otherwiseterminated:b.	Make provision in any settlement for payment of all the costs of the arbitration and fees and expenses due to the SAROD-PORTS and theTribunal.40.3	If the continuation of the arbitral proceedings becomes unnecessaryor impossible for any reason not mentioned in Rule 38.1, before the award is made, the Tribunal shall inform the parties of its intention to issue an order for the termination of the proceedings. The Tribunal shall have the power to issue such an order unless party raises justifiable grounds forobjection.40.4	Copies of the order for termination of the arbitral proceedings or of the arbitral award on agreed terms, signed by the Tribunal, shall be communicated by the Tribunal to the parties through theSecretary.Rule 41- InterestThe Tribunal may award interest on any sum awarded at such rate as applicable in fixed deposits of the Nationalised Bank in India in respect of such periods ending not later thanthe date of the award as the Tribunal considersjust.Rule 42- Costs42.1	The Tribunal shall have the discretion to determine whether costs are payable by one party to another, the amount of such costs, and when such costs are to be paid.42.2	The decision of the Tribunal under Rule 37 above shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Act, as amended from time to time.42.3	The Tribunal has power to order in its Award, that all or part of the legal orother costs (such as legal fees and expenses, costs incurred in respect of party appointed experts etc.) of one party shall be paid by the otherparty.Rule 43 – WaiverA party which is aware of non-compliance with these Rules and yet proceeds with the arbitration without promptly stating its objection in writing such non-compliance shall be deemed to have waived its right to object.Rule 44 - Exclusion of Liability44.1	The Tribunal, the President, the SAROD-Ports and any of itsofficers, employees or agents shall not be liable to any party for any act or omission in connection with any arbitration conducted under theseRules.44.2	After the Award as been made and the possibilities of corrections and additional Awards have lapsed or been exhausted, neither the Tribunal nor the President shall be under any obligation to make any statement to any person about any matter concerning the arbitration, and no party shall seek to make any Arbitrator or the President or the SAROD-Ports and any of its officers a witness in any legal proceedings arising out of thearbitration.Rule 45- General Provisions45.1	In all matters not expressly provided for in these Rules, the President, the Secretary and the Tribunal shall act in the spirit of these Rules and shall make every reasonable effort to ensure the just, expeditious and economical conclusion of thearbitration.45.2	If any of these Rules is in conflict with a mandatory provision of law applicable to the arbitration or the arbitration agreement from which the parties cannot derogate, that mandatory provision shall prevail.45.3	The Secretary may from time to time issue Practice Notes onthe implementation of theseRules.Rule 46- Amendment to RulesThese Rules may from time to time be amended   bytheGoverning Body of SAROD-Ports. SCHEDULE Fees and other miscellaneous expenses for the Arbitrator of SAROD-PortsS. No.	Particulars of Fees and misc. expenses	Amount payable per Arbitrator per case where total sum of all claims or counter-claims in the case before Arbitral Tribunal is up to Rs.100 Crore.	Amount payable per Arbitrator per case where total sum of all claims or counter-claims in the case before Arbitral Tribunal is above Rs.100 crore and up to Rs.500 Crore	Amount payable per Arbitration per case where total sum of all claims or counter-claims in the case before Arbitral Tribunal is above Rs.500 Crores1.	Fee	i)  Rs.25,000/- per day	i)  Rs.40,000/- per day	i)  Rs.50,000/- per day		ii)  25% extra on fee at (i) above in case of fast-track procedure as per Section-29B of Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996;or10% extra on fee at (i) above if award is published within 6 months from date of entering the reference by Arbitral Tribunal.	ii)  10% extra on fee at (i) above if award is published within 6 months from date of entering the reference by Arbitral Tribunal;	ii)  10% extra on fee at (i) above if award is published within 6 months from the date of entering the reference by Arbitral Tribunal. 		Alternatively, the Arbitrator may opt for a lump-sum fee of Rs.5.00 lakh per case including counter-claims	Alternatively, the Arbitrator may opt for a lump-sum fee of Rs.8.00 lakh per case including counter-claims	Alternatively, the Arbitrator may opt for a lump-sum fee of Rs.10.00 lakh per case including counter-claims2.	Reading Charges – One Time	Rs.25,000/- per arbitrator per case including counter claims.	Rs.40,000/- per arbitrator per case including counter claims.	Rs.50,000/- per arbitrator per case including counter claims.3.	One time charges for Secretarial Assistance and incidental charges (Telephone, fax, postage etc.)	Rs.25,000/- per arbitrator per case.	Rs.25,000/- per arbitrator per case.	Rs.25,000/- per arbitrator per case.4.	One-time charges for publishing / declaration of the Award	Rs.40,000/- per arbitrator.	Rs.50,000/- per arbitrator.	Rs.60,000/- per arbitrator5.	Other Expenses (As per actual against bills subject to ceiling given below) (i)	Traveling Expenses	Economy Class (by Air), First Class AC (by Train) and AC Car (by Road @ 13/Km)(ii)	Lodging and Boarding	Rs.15,000/- per day (Metro Cities) orRs.8,000/- per day (in other Cities) orRs.5,000/- per day, if any Arbitrator makes own arrangement.6.	Local Travel	Rs.2,000/- per day7.	Extra Charges for days other than meeting days (Maximum for 2 and half days)	Rs.5,000/- per half-day for outstation Arbitrator. Note	1. Lodging, Boarding and Travelling expenses shall be allowed only for the arbitrator who is residing at least 100 Kms away from the venue of the meeting.2. Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Bengaluru and Hyderabad shall be considered as Metro Cities.                                        *****
























HomeArchiveIndex to Select Questions (1984-1999)Ballot ListStatistical Statements Relating to QuestionsUploading of Questions - Status QueryProcedure for Sending Text of Questions & AnswersDemarcation of responsibilities in Govt. of IndiaBrochure on Statutory Corporations, Companies and Other Bodies in Which the Government of India have financial or controlling interestHighlights pertaining to questions of 17th Lok Sabha






Contact Us 
Disclaimer











        Developed and Hosted by National Informatics Centre (NIC)

Content on this website is published,
            managed & maintained by Software Unit, Computer (HW & SW) Management. Branch,
            Lok Sabha Secretariat





HomeMembersBusinessQuestionsDebatesPapers Laid


LegislationCommitteesSANSAD TVIntranetSecretariatPRIDE


RecruitmentSC/ST ReservationConferenceParliament Library


About ParliamentPhoto GalleryRelated LinksRTITendersFAQ


SpeakerDy. SpeakerLeader of the HousePanel of ChairpersonsContact UsFeedback


Council of MinistersPublications of MinistriesParliamentry ProceduresJournal of Parliamentary Information
Visitor's Counter:113249449







Copyright
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Terms &
                Conditions

                Accessibility Statement
Accessibility
                Options
Feedback
Site Map







