



	Questions : Lok Sabha




























Screen Reader Access
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Navigation



Text Size

                                A

                                A
A















हिन्दी मे








Parliament of India Lok Sabha House of the
                        People






* Special Characters not allowed












India Time 


Your Time 


                        Tuesday,
                        12 April 2022









HomeMembersSitting MembersMembers Home PageMembers' PortalContact DetailsMembers SearchStatistical AnalysisAttendance of MembersHandbook Members Since 1952Digitized Who's WhoOthers BusinessProvisional CalendarList of BusinessPapers to be LaidList of Private Members' BusinessBulletin-IDigitized Lok Sabha Bulletin Part IBulletin-IIStatement of WorkSpecial Mentions (ZERO HOUR)Resume of WorkDigitized Resume of Work done by Lok Sabha QuestionsHomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions DebatesIntroductionSynopsisUncorrected DebateText of DebateDigitized DebatesConstituent Assembly DebatesWit And HumourDebate SearchHindi FontsDisclaimer Papers LaidPapers Laid on the Table of the House LegislationIntroduction(How Bill Becomes Act)Bills IntroducedBills PassedBills PendingBills AssentedBills LapsedBills WithdrawnBills NegativedBills Search Disclaimer CommitteesIntroductionChairpersonSummary of WorkCommittee Meetings ScheduleBills Referred to CommitteesReports PresentedDigitized ReportsPress ReleaseMembership SearchToday's Committee MeetingsCommittee Subject SelectedDepartment Related-RS Govt. AssurancesSANSAD TVIntranet





HomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions











Download as PDF




Print












PDF/WORD(Hindi)


PDF/WORD




                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
                                





                                    MINISTRY OF
                                    SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT






                                    LOK SABHA
                                





UNSTARRED 


                                    QUESTION NO:
                                

1088






                                    ANSWERED ON: 
                                

08.02.2022






Increase in Elderly Population




Mimi Chakraborty














                        Will the Minister of





SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT


                        be pleased to state:-















                                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIAMINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENTLOK SABHAUNSTARRED QUESTION NO.1088TO BE ANSWERED ON 08.02.2022INCREASE IN ELDERLY POPULATION 1088. MS. MIMI CHAKRABORTY: Will the Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state: (a) whether in next three decades, one in five Indians will be aged 60 years or more and population of India is projected to increase to nearly 20% in 2050, if so, the details thereof; (b) the present status and the programmes for the benefit of elderly people in the country therein; and(c) the proposal of the Government to ensure the social security to the old age persons?






ANSWER




                                                        ANSWERMINISTER OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT(DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR)(a) to (c): According to the ‘Longitudinal Ageing Study in India (LASI)’ Report  2020,  conducted by National Programme for Health Care and International Institute of Population Sciences, the population of senior citizens is expected to be 31.90 crore by 2050, which is 19.5% of the total population projected. Details of present status and the programmes for the benefit of senior citizens and to ensure the social security to them are at Annexure.***** ANNEXURE [Reply to Parts (a) to (c) of Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 1088 for 08.02.2022 regarding ‘Increase in Elderly Population’ raised by Hon’ble M.P. MS. MIMI CHAKRABORTY] Details of  Schemes and Programmes being implemented by Government of India Department of Social Justice and EmpowermentAtal Vayo Abhyudaya Yojana (AVYAY) AVYAY brings together articulation of each of the current schemes, future plans, strategies and targets and maps it with schemes/programmes, accountabilities, financials and clear outcomes. This Plan takes care of the top four needs of the senior citizens viz financial security, food, health care and human interaction /life of dignity. It also includes the facets of safety/protection and general wellbeing of the elderly beginning from awareness generation and sensitization of the society. 2.         AVYAY is an umbrella scheme, effective since 1st April 2021, has following sub- schemes under it, namely:•	Scheme of Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens (IPSrC)•	State Action Plan for Senior Citizens (SAPSrC)•	Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana’ (RVY)•	Livelihood and Skilling Initiatives for Senior Citizens - Senior Able Citizens for Re-Employment in Dignity (SACRED);       Action Groups Aimed at Social Reconstruction (AGRASR Groups):Elderly Self Help groups•	Promoting silver economy•	Channelizing CSR funds for Elderly care•	Scheme for Awareness Generation and Capacity Building for welfare of Senior Citizens – Training, Awareness, Sensitization, Setting up of National Helpline for Senior Citizens. 3.         Under the Scheme of Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens (IPSrC), grants upto 100% of project cost are given for running and maintenance the following projects:- (i) Maintenance of Senior Citizens'' Homes for 25 beneficiaries including those under Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) to provide food, care and shelter for a minimum number of 25 indigent Senior Citizens.(ii) Maintenance of Senior Citizens'' Homes for 50 beneficiaries including those under Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) to provide food, care and shelter for a minimum number of 50 indigent Senior Citizens (male only/male and female combined). (iii) Maintenance of Senior Citizens'' Homes for 50 elderly women only:  For elderly woman indigents, all components shall be the same as in Senior Citizens Home for 50 Mixed Gender beneficiaries, except that the beneficiaries will be senior citizen women only.(iv) Maintenance of Continuous Care Homes and Homes for senior citizens afflicted with Alzheimer''s disease/ Dementia for a minimum of 20 Senior Citizens who are seriously ill requiring continuous nursing care and respite or those who are afflicted with Alzheimer''s disease/ Dementia.(v) Maintenance of Regional Resource and Training Centres. Regional Resource and Training Centres (RRTCs) work as key nodal agency on aged care and coordination under overall direction & supervision of Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, providing overall technical support and inputs on senior citizens programs in their assigned States allocated by the Ministry. (v) Maintenance of Mobile Medicare Unit (MMU) for Senior Citizens and Physiotherapy Clinics for Senior Citizens: Renewal/Ongoing projects of MMU and Physiotherapy Clinics for senior citizens henceforth will continue to be supported by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment under the IPSrC. No new MMU /Physiotherapy Clinics shall be supported under the scheme w.e.f 01.04.2021.  4.         Under the Scheme, assistance is sanctioned to the following agencies subject to the terms and conditions laid down by this Ministry:-•	Priority to be given to the State Governments / UT Administrations for supporting the projects under the Scheme of IPSrC through Registered Societies/ Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) / Local bodies, in the vicinity of Hospitals, as far as possible;•	Non-Governmental/Voluntary Organizations;•	Institutions or Organizations set up by Government as autonomous/ subordinate bodies;•	Government Recognized Educational Institutions, Charitable Hospitals/ Nursing Homes, and recognized youth organizations such as Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS)5.         Under State Action Plan for Senior Citizens (SAPSrC), the Government of India perceives a major and critical role of all State Governments in partnering and implementing the Action Plan for welfare of senior citizens. Appreciating the critical and significant role of States/UTs, each State/UT is expected to plan and strategize taking into account their local considerations and frame their own State Action Plans for the welfare of their senior citizens. This State Action Plan may comprise a long-term strategy for five years as well as Annual Action Plans and this Department shall release funds to the States/UTs for formulation and implementation of their State Action Plans. 6.         Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana (RVY): Scheme for providing Physical Aids and Assisted-Living Devices for Senior Citizens The Scheme of Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana (RVY) has been formulated by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment with an objective to provide aids and assisted living devices viz. walking sticks, elbow crutches, walkers/crutches, tripods/quadpods, hearing aids, wheelchairs, artificial dentures and spectacles, free of cost to senior citizens belonging to BPL category who suffer from age related disabilities/infirmities such as low vision, hearing impairment, loss of teeth and loco-motor disabilities. The Scheme has been revised w.e.f. F.Y. 2020-21. Under the revised Scheme, the criteria of selection of beneficiaries have been extended to include not only those senior citizens belonging to BPL category but also senior citizens with monthly income not more than Rs. 15000/- and who suffer from age related disabilities/infirmities as mentioned above.            Under the revised Scheme of RVY, the number of devices hitherto provided has been increased. At present, following are the items that have been included for distribution: (a) Generic Items:     (1)Walking sticks (2) Elbow crutches (3) Walkers/Crutches,(4) Tripods/Quadpods (5) Hearing Aids (6) Artificial Dentures, and (7) Spectacles.(b) Special Items:     (1) Wheelchairs, (2) Wheel Chairs with Commode, (3) Chair/Stool with Commode, (4) Silicon Foam Cushion, (5) Knee Brace, (6) Spinal Support, (7) Cervical Collar, (8) Lumbosacral Belt (LS), (9) Walker/Roalator with Brakes, (10) Walking Stick with Seat,(11) Foot Care Kit:- (i) Flexi Gel Socks, (ii) Socks Cusion Sandal, (iii) Silicon Insole (Complete Foot/Ankle) and (iv) Insole with Pressure Point Relief. 7.         Livelihood and Skilling Initiatives for Senior Citizens- A new scheme with following two components:- (i)         Senior Able Citizens for Re-Employment in Dignity (SACRED)- Many senior citizens have experience, time and energy which can be used by the business enterprises looking for stable employees with experience. The Human resources cells of many private enterprises seek experienced but stable persons in certain positions. The portal allows bringing these people together by virtual matching of preferences. The portal has been launched by the Vice President of India on the occasion of International Day on Older Persons (IDOP) i.e. on 01.10.2021. (ii)        Action Groups Aimed at Social Reconstruction (AGRASR Groups): Elderly Self Help groups - The Senior Citizens are encouraged to form Self-Help Groups (SHGs), which will provide them with a platform to share the time constructively with each other. To attain financial assistance under the scheme SHGs will function as ‘Action Groups Aimed at Social Reconstruction (AGRASR Groups)’. Assistance under this Scheme to any SHG will be independent of assistance under any other scheme of the Ministry and an SHG can choose to avail assistance under any one or more Scheme(s). 8.         Promoting Silver Economy – This is also a new scheme launched with an objective to encourage the entrepreneurs for to think about the problems of the elderly and come out with innovative solutions. The Government aims to achieve the objective by providing financial assistance through equity participation, through an open invitation on a portal namely Seniorcare Ageing Growth Engine (SAGE) portal. The selected start-ups/start-up ideas can be provided equity support of upto Rs.1 crore per project while ensuring that the total Govt equity in the start-up should not exceed 49%.  9.         Channelizing CSR funds for Elderly care-  This is also a new scheme with an objective to channelize the CSR funds in an appropriate manner for elderly care projects. Under Schedule VII of Section 135 of the Companies Act, setting up old age homes, day care centres and such facilities for Senior Citizens is an approved item for CSR funding. 10.       Scheme for Awareness Generation and Capacity Building for welfare of Senior Citizens- Components like the National Helpline for Senior Citizens, Research, awareness, sensitization etc. for the welfare of senior citizens, spreading awareness and sensitizing the youth and other sections of the society towards the issues related to the elderly. The Helpline known as Elderline with tollfree number 14567 has been dedicated to the Nation by the Vice President of India on 01.10.2021.Other Initiatives of D/o Social Justice and Empowerment 1.     National Policy on Older Persons (NPOP), 1999:  National Policy on Older Persons (NPOP) had been announced in January 1999 to reaffirm the commitment to ensure the well-being of the older persons. The Policy envisaged State support to ensure financial and food security, health care, shelter and other needs of older persons, equitable share in development, protection against abuse and exploitation, and availability of services to improve the quality of their lives. The primary objectives were to encourage individuals to make provision for their own as well as their spouse''s old age; to encourage families to take care of their older family members; to enable and support voluntary and non-governmental organizations to supplement the care provided by the family; to provide care and protection to the vulnerable elderly people; to provide adequate healthcare facility to the elderly; to promote research and training facilities to train geriatric care givers and organizers of services for the elderly; and to create awareness regarding elderly persons to help them lead productive and independent live.  2.     The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (MWPSC) Act, 2007: The MWPSC Act, 2007 had been enacted in December 2007 to ensure need based maintenance for parents and senior citizens and their welfare. The Act provides for Maintenance of Parents/ senior citizens by children/ relatives made  obligatory and justiciable through Tribunals, Revocation of transfer of property by senior citizens in case of neglect by relatives, Penal provision for abandonment of senior citizens, Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens, Adequate medical facilities and security for Senior Citizens. 3.        Senior Citizens'' Welfare Fund (SCWF): In pursuance of the Budget Announcement, 2015-16, a "Senior Citizens'' Welfare Fund" has been created to be utilized for such schemes, for promoting financial security of senior citizens, healthcare and nutrition of senior citizens, welfare of elderly widows, schemes relating to Old Age Homes, Short Stay Homes and Day Care of senior citizens etc. , for  the promotion of the welfare of senior citizens. The Fund comprises of the unclaimed amounts transferred by every institution holding such fund in the Schemes including Small Savings and other Saving Schemes of the Central Government such as Post Office Savings Accounts, Post Office Recurring Deposits Accounts etc., Accounts of Public Provident Funds and Accounts of Employees Provident Fund, that remain unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of the account being declared as inoperative account. 4.        National Council for Senior Citizens (NCSrC):  In pursuance of the National Policy for Older Persons (NPOP), 1999, a National Council for Older Persons (NCOP) was constituted in 1999 to oversee implementation of the Policy and to advise the Government in the formulation and implementation of policy and programmes for the aged. The National Council for Older Persons (NCOP) has been reconstituted and renamed as National Council of Senior Citizens (NCSrC) in 2012.  The mandate of NCSrC is to advise Central and State Governments on the entire gamut of issues related to welfare of senior citizens and enhancement of their quality of life. The Hon’ble Minister, Social Justice and Empowerment, is the Chairperson of the Council. 5.         National Award ‘Vayoshreshtha Samman’: Every year, this Ministry confers National Award ‘Vayoshreshtha Samman’ to eminent senior citizens and institutions in recognition of  their contribution to the society. This is in order to showcase the Government’s concern for senior citizens and its commitment towards senior citizens with the aim of strengthening their legitimate place in the society. The Vayoshrestha Samman award started since 2005, which was upgraded to the status of National Award in 2013. The Awards are given under thirteen categories. Mementos, certificates and cash awards are presented to the awardees. 6.         Observance of International Day of Older Persons (IDOP): On 1st October every year, this Ministry observes International Day for Older Persons by conferring National Award ‘Vayoshreshtha Samman’ to eminine senior citizens and institutions involved in rendering distinguished services for the cause of elderly persons, especially indigent senior citizens. Further, Health Camps, Inter-generational walkathons etc. are organised in different States with active participation of Senior Citizens, Youth, Celebrities and Media-persons etc. Schemes, Programmes, Concession and Benefits for senior citizens, being provided by other Ministries/Departments: 1.         Ministry of Rural Development: Old age pension is provided under Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS) to aged persons belonging to below poverty line (BPL) household. Central assistance of Rs. 200/- per month is provided to the persons of 60-79 years of age and Rs. 500/- per month to the persons of age of 80 years or more. This Scheme is implemented by the States/UTs. Identification of beneficiaries, sanction and disbursement of benefit under the schemes is done by the States/UTs. A total of 221 lakh is the targeted beneficiaries under IGNOAPS. 2.  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare:            “National Programme for the Health Care of Elderly” (NPHCE) launched during 2010-11 is State oriented program with the basic thrust to provide comprehensive and dedicated health care facilities to the elderly persons above 60 year of age at various level of primary, secondary and tertiary health care.3.         MINISTRY OF FINANCE:        Ministry of Finance has launched a scheme namely ‘Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana’ (PMVVY) to provide social security during old age and to protect elderly persons aged 60 and above against a future fall in their interest income due to uncertain market conditions. The Scheme enables old age income security for senior citizens through provision of assured pension/ return linked to the subscription amount based on Government guarantee to Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). 2.         PMVVY is open for subscription upto 31st March 2023 and offers an assured rate of return of 7.40% per annum for the year 2020-21 for policy duration of 10 years. In subsequent years, while the Scheme is in operation full month 2023, there will be annual reset of assured rate of return with effect from April 1st of the financial year in line with applicable rate of return of Senior Citizens Saving Scheme (SCSS) upto a ceiling of 7.75% with fresh appraisal of the scheme on breach of this threshold at any point.3.         The differential return, i.e. the difference between return generated by LIC and the assured returns would be borne by Government of India as subsidy on an annual basis. Pension is payable at the end of each period during the policy tenure of 10 years as per the frequency of monthly/ quarterly/ half-yearly as chosen by the subscriber at the time of purchase. Minimum purchase price under the scheme is Rs. 1,62,162/- for a minimum pension of Rs. 1,000/- per month and the maximum purchase price is Rs. 15 lakh per senior citizen for getting a pension amount of Rs. 9,250/-.4.         The Scheme is being implemented through Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). A total number of 5,83,208 subscribers are being benefited under the scheme as on 31st December, 2020. 4.         MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS:      Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Department of Urban Development has issued the Model Building Bye Laws, 2016 (MBBL) prescribing standards for creation of elder friendly barrier free environment with reference to buildings, toilets etc. Urban Local Bodies shall implement the Policy by adopting the Model Building Bye Laws, 2016. Further, under Urban Bus Specification-II issued in 2013, the emphasis on buses financed by the Department of Urban Development is on procurement of low floor buses with proper ramps for easy access of the passengers and proper space for wheelchair to be placed in the bus for the benefit of disabled persons and senior citizens. All metro rail projects implemented/under implementation in the country are having disabled and elder friendly infrastructure such as proper ramps/lifts to the stations. There is a provision for reservation of seats in metro rail coaches for differently-abled persons and senior citizens.  Further, Housing for All Mission/Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana Guidelines have been circulated to State/UTs to meet the demand of housing in their States/UTs, which interalia incorporates that ‘while making the allotment, families with senior citizens should be given priority for allotment on ground floor or lower floors’. Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs is implementing the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Urban Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NULM) with the aim to reduce poverty and vulnerability of urban poor households on sustainable basis. The Mission, inter-alia, aims at providing permanent shelter equipped with essential services to the urban homeless in a phased manner under the component of Shelters for Urban Homeless, irrespective of age.*****
























HomeArchiveIndex to Select Questions (1984-1999)Ballot ListStatistical Statements Relating to QuestionsUploading of Questions - Status QueryProcedure for Sending Text of Questions & AnswersDemarcation of responsibilities in Govt. of IndiaBrochure on Statutory Corporations, Companies and Other Bodies in Which the Government of India have financial or controlling interestHighlights pertaining to questions of 17th Lok Sabha






Contact Us 
Disclaimer











        Developed and Hosted by National Informatics Centre (NIC)

Content on this website is published,
            managed & maintained by Software Unit, Computer (HW & SW) Management. Branch,
            Lok Sabha Secretariat





HomeMembersBusinessQuestionsDebatesPapers Laid


LegislationCommitteesSANSAD TVIntranetSecretariatPRIDE


RecruitmentSC/ST ReservationConferenceParliament Library


About ParliamentPhoto GalleryRelated LinksRTITendersFAQ


SpeakerDy. SpeakerLeader of the HousePanel of ChairpersonsContact UsFeedback


Council of MinistersPublications of MinistriesParliamentry ProceduresJournal of Parliamentary Information
Visitor's Counter:113256427







Copyright
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Terms &
                Conditions

                Accessibility Statement
Accessibility
                Options
Feedback
Site Map







