



	Questions : Lok Sabha




























Screen Reader Access
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Navigation



Text Size

                                A

                                A
A















हिन्दी मे








Parliament of India Lok Sabha House of the
                        People






* Special Characters not allowed












India Time 


Your Time 


                        Tuesday,
                        12 April 2022









HomeMembersSitting MembersMembers Home PageMembers' PortalContact DetailsMembers SearchStatistical AnalysisAttendance of MembersHandbook Members Since 1952Digitized Who's WhoOthers BusinessProvisional CalendarList of BusinessPapers to be LaidList of Private Members' BusinessBulletin-IDigitized Lok Sabha Bulletin Part IBulletin-IIStatement of WorkSpecial Mentions (ZERO HOUR)Resume of WorkDigitized Resume of Work done by Lok Sabha QuestionsHomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions DebatesIntroductionSynopsisUncorrected DebateText of DebateDigitized DebatesConstituent Assembly DebatesWit And HumourDebate SearchHindi FontsDisclaimer Papers LaidPapers Laid on the Table of the House LegislationIntroduction(How Bill Becomes Act)Bills IntroducedBills PassedBills PendingBills AssentedBills LapsedBills WithdrawnBills NegativedBills Search Disclaimer CommitteesIntroductionChairpersonSummary of WorkCommittee Meetings ScheduleBills Referred to CommitteesReports PresentedDigitized ReportsPress ReleaseMembership SearchToday's Committee MeetingsCommittee Subject SelectedDepartment Related-RS Govt. AssurancesSANSAD TVIntranet





HomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions











Download as PDF




Print












PDF/WORD(Hindi)


PDF/WORD




                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
                                





                                    MINISTRY OF
                                    WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT






                                    LOK SABHA
                                





UNSTARRED 


                                    QUESTION NO:
                                

5029






                                    ANSWERED ON: 
                                

01.04.2022






Corruption in Anganwadi Kendra




Rahul Kaswan














                        Will the Minister of





WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT


                        be pleased to state:-















(a)	whether alleged deep rooted corruption in Anganwadi Kendra regarding quality, authenticity and other criteria for nutritional meals distributed at such centres, has been observed/reported;(b)	if so, the details of such cases reported in Rajasthan, district-wise;(c)	whether complaints are being received about Mahila Bal Vikas Adhikari and other staff at Anganwadi Kendras for giving the task of distribution of nutritional meals to Non-Governmental Organization and their Self-Help Groups;(d)	if so, the steps taken/proposed to be taken by the Government to prevent malpractices in nutritional meals distribution; and(e)	whether the Government proposes to bring any policy for ensuring transparency in distribution of nutritional meals to every child below the age of five years?






ANSWER




GOVERNMENT OF INDIAMINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT LOK SABHAUNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 5029 TO BE ANSWERED ON 01.04.2022 CORRUPTION IN ANGANWADI KENDRA 5029. SHRI RAHUL KASWAN:           Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state: (a)	whether alleged deep rooted corruption in Anganwadi Kendra regarding quality, authenticity and other criteria for nutritional meals distributed at such centres, has been observed/reported;(b)	if so, the details of such cases reported in Rajasthan, district-wise;(c)	whether complaints are being received about Mahila Bal Vikas Adhikari and other staff at Anganwadi Kendras for giving the task of distribution of nutritional meals to Non-Governmental Organization and their Self-Help Groups;(d)	if so, the steps taken/proposed to be taken by the Government to prevent malpractices in nutritional meals distribution; and(e)	whether the Government proposes to bring any policy for ensuring transparency in distribution of nutritional meals to every child below the age of five years? ANSWER MINISTER OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT(SHRIMATI SMRITI ZUBIN IRANI) (a) to (d):        Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 (earlier known as Anganwadi Services under Umbrella Integrated Child Development  Services)  is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and the administration, management & monitoring regarding implementation of the Anganwadi Services is being done by the concerned State Government/UT Administration. All Human resource matters including recruitment, training, retirement etc are being handled by the concerned State Government/UT Administration. The States/ UTs are responsible for their administrative control. Action against any misconduct or  involvement of any employee in corrupt practices is taken by the respective State Governments/ UT Administrations as per their service rules. (e)       This Ministry, vide letter dated 13.01.2021 (Annexure) have issued  Streamlining Guidelines on Quality Assurance, Roles and Responsibilities of Duty Holders, procedure for procurement, Integrating AYUSH concepts and Data Management and Monitoring through ‘Poshan Tracker’ for transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of Supplementary Nutrition.  Further, a robust ICT enabled platform named Poshan tracker has been designed to capture real-time data on implementation and monitoring of Anganwadi Services across the country. The Poshan Tracker management application provides a 360 - degree view of the activities of the Anganwadi Centre (AWC), service deliveries of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and complete beneficiary management. *****No. CD-I-24/2/2022-US (e-90701)Government of IndiaMinistry of Women and Child DevelopmentShastri Bhawan        To                     New Delhi   Dated 13th January 2021The Chief Secretary All States/UTs  Subject:   Streamlining Guidelines on Quality Assurance, Roles and Responsibilities of Duty Holders, procedure for procurement, integrating AYUSH concepts and Data Management and Monitoring through ‘Poshan Tracker’ for transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of Supplementary Nutrition - reg Sir/ Madam, The Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) under Anganwadi Services and the POSHAN Abhiyaan are important programmes to address the issue of malnutrition in the country. Under these programmes, there is need to ensure that entitlements reach the intended beneficiaries in a time-bound manner as per quality and nutritional standards for the achievement of nutritional goals. Towards this objective, existing guidelines are streamlined as follows: Quality Assurance:Adherence to Quality Standards and Testing:States/UTs shall ensure the quality of Supplementary Nutrition being provided with reference to the norms of food safety as well as nutrient composition. Supplementary Nutrition must conform to prescribed standards laid down under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and regulations made thereunder to ensure consistent quality and nutritive value per serving. The periodicity of sample testing shall be once in a quarter of an annual year, per project.Take-Home Ration (not raw ration), shall be tested from FSSAI owned/registered/empaneled/NABL accredited laboratory. Random testing must be conducted by Anganwadi Services functionaries after receipt of stock at the AWC or at the Block level. Anganwadi Services functionaries i.e. CDPO or Supervisor shall draw the samples, as per the prescribed procedure and send the sample for testing to a FSSAI owned/registered/empaneled/NABL accredited laboratory.        In case of Hot Cooked Meal, it should be ensured that it is prepared in proper kitchen sheds having adequate sanitation and safe drinking water so as to maintain hygienic conditions. 2.	Supply-Chain Management: Supply chain process in the States must be made transparent for functionaries to ensure uninterrupted supply to the last mile, which are compliant with FSSAI registration-licensing process for entities involved in manufacture, storage and distribution of food to ensure food safety and hygiene.A.	 At District Level:The District Magistrate shall be the Nodal Point in the district for monitoring nutritional status and quality standards. The DM/Collector shall chair, supervise and monitor the activities of the District Nutrition Committee. Nutrition Experts suggested in District Committee have to be mandatorily certified nutrition experts. The Child Development Project Officer (CDPO) who is responsible for administration and implementation of nutrition and ICDS projects, shall carry out major responsibilities as follows under the supervision of the DM/Collector: •	coordinate and evaluate deliveries in the district as a Key Performance Indicator of the DM/Collector for nutritional improvement of beneficiaries, especially SAM/MAM children; •	undertake overall administration and coordination of the nutrition project and ensure smooth and effective delivery of all intended services in the project jurisdiction; •	conduct periodic monitoring including surprise spot-checks, draw samples for quality testing of supplementary nutrition (THR and HCM) provided, ensure adequate measures for food safety and hygiene are followed throughout the supply chain, assess the quality of pre-school delivery etc., to ensure quality and undertake necessary course correction; •	monitor distribution of necessary stocks for delivery of key services; •	participate in the VHSND meetings, community-based events, Jan Andolan activities etc. to motivate field functionaries and beneficiaries; •	facilitate preparation of Block Convergence Action Plan and its implementation; •	conduct Joint Field Visits with Medical Officer (MD) and Joint Review Meetings on monthly basis, especially with regards to SAM children; •	ensure collation of monthly progress reports for the District and share with the State; •	when visiting AWCs, CDPO must conduct home-visits for pregnant women, new-born and infants crossing 6-months and undertake age-appropriate nutrition counseling, to train and demonstrate the importance of home-visits and counseling to AWWs and motivate them to undertake regular home visits. B.	 At State Level: Nutrition requires convergence of various services that contribute to improved nutritional status. This requires strong and effective multi-department convergent efforts and actions to address malnutrition. Therefore, Chief Secretary of the States/UTs should coordinate the activities of various departments through a State Level Steering Committee to ensure effective convergence between various schemes/programs having bearing on nutrition and review the progress made regarding Nutritional Indicators on regular basis. Secretaries of different departments may assess how their schemes/programs can positively impact nutrition levels and also how POSHAN Abhiyaan can be supported to build awareness and create Jan Andolan around nutrition.  (C)           In Village: Involvement of AWC Level Management Committees, village communities, Mothers Groups, and Panchayati Raj Institutions (Poshan Panchayats) will bring community ownership and encourage accountability.  3.          Data Management and Monitoring through Poshan Tracker: The POSHAN Tracker has been built by Ministry of Women and Child Development, Govt of India using centralized data architecture that also aligns with the digital technology systems of other Ministries and programs. The system provides a digital identity to each beneficiary and generates automated alerts to the critical last-mile beneficiaries. It also ensures efficient audit of the delivery system by documenting real time attendance of beneficiaries and duty bearers. Such a robust digital technology platform and management information system will help the nutrition mission to scale efficiently, thereby generating significant positive impact and documentation thereof. Poshan Tracker management application will provide a 360-degree view of the activities of the Anganwadi Centre (AWC), service deliveries of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and complete beneficiary management for pregnant women, lactating mothers and children. The system enables real-time monitoring and tracking of all AWCs, AWWs and beneficiaries on defined indicators. It also ensures efficient audit of the delivery system, by documenting real time attendance of beneficiaries, duty bearers and actual receipt of Supplementary Nutrition through QR Code/OTP etc. Such a robust digital technology platform and management information system will help to bring positive impact. Hence, all States/ UTs shall mandatorily implement Poshan Tracker. 4.  Procedure for Procurement:  State/UT must introduce transparent processes for procurement as per GFR and vigilance guidelines and ensure that THR procured conforms to technical and nutritional standards set by MoWCD. 5.	Convergence:  Roles and Responsibilities at Grassroots Level Oversight services at the grassroots level by key stakeholders are critical for achieving good nutritional outcomes. Such services can be strengthened appropriately by counseling the mothers of children at AWCs. The Mothers Groups and Poshan Panchayat platforms can play an important role in ensuring that interventions designed to address malnutrition are monitored and successfully implemented in each household. Details are at Annexure I.  6.  Integrating AYUSH concepts for holistic nourishment The Science of AYUSH is a system that builds and promotes health and wellness and can address the requirements of nutrition by tapping into the country’s indigenous traditional practices. Details are at Annexure II. 7.     States shall launch a drive for identification of SAM children for referral to hospitals (if required) and AYUSH centers in accordance with the detailed action plan approved by the District Nutrition Committee to be finalized in consultation with the Chief Medical Officer. This exercise shall be completed by 31st January 2021. The suggested composition of the District Nutrition Committee is at Annexure III. 8.     Nutrition is a multi-faceted concept with multiple determinants. While Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) deliver services aimed at improving nutrition, the role of other functionaries and programs are equally vital. Health care, water, sanitation, hygiene, mother’s education, etc. are some of the critical factors that contribute to improved nutritional status. Ensuring that all these services converge on a household is essential for reducing undernutrition in the country. This calls for strong and effective convergent actions on nutritional quality and delivery. Detailed joint letters issued to States/ UTs by this Ministry converging with other Ministries, are annexed herewith for ready reference. Convergence with various departments may regularly be reviewed for effective implementation.  9.     States/ UTs are required to adhere to these guidelines scrupulously.  10.   Guidelines on Convergence are given at Annexure IV.  This issues with approval of Competent Authority. Encl: As Above(Dr Harmeet Singh)Director  Copy to:All concerned GoI Ministries     Annexure I Convergence Initiatives for Improving Nutrition:  Roles and Responsibilities of Key Grassroots Stakeholders Family / Mother In the fight against hunger and under nutrition, perhaps the most important timeframe is the first 1,000 days between a woman’s pregnancy and her child’s 2nd birthday. The right nutrition during this 1,000-day window can have a profound impact on a child’s ability to grow, learn, and rise out of poverty. A community’s long-term economic health, stability and prosperity hangs in the balance when children are at risk. Young children, especially those under two, are at a fragile time in their physical development. Malnutrition and under nutrition during this timeframe can have long-term and irreversible effects. More than a quarter of children under two years of age do not eat a diversified diet. There is a direct correlation between mothers’ education and the well-being of children.  Children with mothers with no education have least diversified diets. Levels of stunting, wasting and anaemia prevalence are higher in children whose mothers received no schooling. Mother’s nutrition-related knowledge can be assessed based on five key nutrition and health information as follows: (i) mother’s knowledge of the important of colostrum; (ii) knowledge of continued breastfeeding; (iii) knowledge of diarrhea prevention and treatment using Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS); (iv) knowledge of child immunization; and (v) knowledge of family planning. It is important for Mothers Groups to receive counseling at the Poshan Panchayats on key nutrition and health information. These counseling sessions can be organized by the CDPO/DPO once a fortnight. AWWs in the panchayat area and the VHSNC should also participate for coordinated and meaningful outcomes. Mothers Groups can use the platform of the Poshan Panchayat and AWC to pool-in knowledge on traditional recipes and food formulations and make efforts to popularize these in their households and in community-based events. Poshan Panchayats The role of Panchayati Raj Institutions is very important for the success of nutritional interventions. The Panchayati Raj Department through Poshan Panchayats can play a very active role for malnutrition free India through a Jan Andolan. Awareness generation on the effects of malnutrition at the Poshan Panchayat platform can be the first step. At the grassroots level, Poshan Panchayats can serve as a useful convergence platform for Mothers Groups and VHSNC to discuss issues of nutrition and wellness and sensitize people about the importance of nutritional deliveries for children at the AWC level.  Functionaries of the Anganwadi Centre (AWW, AWH, ASHA and AXM) should participate such meetings.  The Poshan Panchayat shall also have the mandate of oversight services with regard to receipt of THR (not raw ration), quality thereof and distribution to all beneficiaries.  Village Health and Nutrition Committee The committee has been formed to take collective actions on issues related to health and its social determinants at the village level. They are particularly envisaged as being central to ‘local level community action’ under NRHM, to support the process of decentralised Health Planning. Thus, the committee is envisaged to take leadership in providing a platform for improving health awareness and access of community for health services, address specific local needs and serve as a mechanism for community-based planning and monitoring.The committee is formed at the revenue village level and is expected to act as a sub-committee of the Gram Panchayat.  All those working for health and health related services should participate, including community members/ beneficiaries and representation from all community sub-groups especially vulnerable sections and hamlets/ habitations. Roles and Responsibilities o	  Create awareness about nutritional issues and significance of nutrition as an important determinant of health.o	  Carry out survey on nutritional status and nutritional deficiencies in the village especially among women and children.o	  Identify locally available food stuffs of high nutrient value as well as disseminate and promote best practices (traditional wisdom) congruent with local culture, capabilities and physical environment through a process of community consultation.o	 Include nutritional needs in the Village Health Plan – The committee will do an in-depth analysis of causes of malnutrition at the community and household levels, by involving the ANM, AWW, ASHA and ICDS Supervisors.o	  Monitor and supervise Village Health and Nutrition Day to ensure that it is organized every month in the village with the active participation of the whole village.o	  Facilitate early detection of malnourished children in the community; tie up referral to the nearest Nutritional Rehabilitation Centre (NRC) as well as follow up for sustained outcome.o	  Supervise the functioning of Anganwadi Centre (AWC) in the village and facilitate its working in improving nutritional status of women and children.o	  Act as a grievance’s redressal forum on health and nutrition issues. Source: NRLM District AYUSH In-charge AYUSH facilities are co-located in several District Hospitals, Community Health Centers and Primary Health Centers in the country. The principles and therapeutics of Ayurveda as modalities of intervention for community nutrition and health problems shall be leveraged to create wellness and develop conditions of holistic nourishment.  District AYUSH in-charge will focus on prevention of diseases and promotion of wellness through Yoga, cultivation of medicinal herbs in Poshan Vatikas, and preparation of AYUSH formulations to address conditions like anaemia.  ***  Annexure IIIntegrating AYUSH Concepts for Holistic Nourishment: 1.	    Nourishment through Poshan Vatikas To support awareness and outreach on nutrition, micro-nutri-environments shall be created in every village. Leveraging convergence for food & nutrition, Poshan Vatikas (kitchen gardens and nutri-gardens) shall be set up where benefits can easily be given to women and children.   To initiate this program, the space in Anganwadi Centres, panchayat areas, vacant lands of village, any other government premises such as school campus or any other patch of community/government land available in the locality, etc. can be utilized. The main objective of introducing the concept of Poshan Vatika is to encourage community members to cultivate local food crops in their backyards. A nutrition garden ensures an inexpensive, regular and handy supply of fresh fruits and vegetables that are basic to good nutrition. Green vegetables contain vitamins and minerals that protect against micro-nutrient deficiencies and diseases.  The cultivation of local vegetables, fruits and important herbs and medicinal plants in these areas will be a critical resource to fulfill nutritional needs locally and generate economic activity for local cultivators and village industry. The fruits and vegetables grown in the Poshan Vatika can be used for consumption by beneficiaries, for preparing traditional recipes (regional meals) and for motivating the local community for diet diversity.  Guidelines for management and distribution can be devised at the State/UT level in convergence with nutrition forestry support by MoEF under Campa Fund and convergence with MGNREGS, horticulture and other plantations, AWC Level Management Committees, village communities, Poshan Panchayats, Mothers Groups can bring community ownership and encourage accountability. AYUSH can populate the Poshan Vatikas with medicinal plants and herbs as a convergence activity with Agriculture District Officer and KVKs. Poshan Vatikas can meet the important dietary diversity gap that has been repeatedly revealed in different surveys by providing different fruits, nuts, herbs and vegetables round the year, thus helping in introducing healthy eating practices to address malnutrition. These can be retrofitted with backyard poultry and fishery units in regions where these are culturally acceptable. Dietary diversity can be as important as dietary adequacy and in case of certain micronutrient deficiencies, even more crucial than the dietary adequacy, particularly in younger ages.  The garden may act as a demonstration activity site for children to enhance their knowledge on plants and their growth process. It can also be used to demonstrate agricultural technique to the community members and for delivering nutrition messages to pregnant women, lactating mothers and the wider community.  Anganwadi Workers shall counsel the beneficiaries to sensitize them on the importance of a Nutrition Garden, nutritional value of fruits and vegetables, their importance in healthy and balanced diets and consequences of their deficiencies. States/UTs shall develop IEC material on Nutrition Gardens and provide to field functionaries to generate awareness.  District level Implementation and Monitoring Committee headed by District Collector shall oversee the development of Poshan Vatikas in convergence with MoEF, MoPRI and AYUSH. 2.	Encourage Yoga for Wellness: AYUSH will propagate the campaigns of ''Yoga at Home, Yoga with Family'' at AWCs and households to encourage beneficiaries to practice yoga and stay healthy.***   District Magistrate/District Collector 	ChairpersonChief Executive Officer, Zila Parishad/DRDA 	Member District Forest Officer (Social Forestry/ CAMPA)	MemberSub-Divisional Magistrate 	MemberChief Medical Officer, Health and Family Welfare 	MemberDistrict Program Manager, NHM 	MemberDistrict Education Officer 	MemberDistrict Planning Officer 	Member District Social Welfare (Women and Child Development) Officer 	Member SecretaryDistrict officer, Rural Development/Rural Livelihoods Mission	MemberDistrictDistrict AYUSH-in Charge	MemberExecutive Engineer (Public Health Engineering, Water and Sanitation)	MemberDistrict Agriculture Officer/ District Horticulture Officer 	MemberAny other Department Head of the district nominated by the Chairman	MemberNutrition Experts (2) Nominated by the Chairman	MemberAnnexure III Suggested Composition of District Nutrition Committee   District Nutrition Committee: Nutrition Experts suggested in District Committee have to be mandatorily certified nutrition experts.            3/158 143/1587557733487697//22002211//POM/o Under Secreatry 153/1588557733487697//22002211//POM/o Under Secreatry 163/1589557733487697//22002211//POM/o Under Secreatry 173/1680557733487697//22002211//POM/o Under Secreatry No. CD-I-24/2/2021-US ( e.90701)???? ?????/Government of India????? ??? ??? ????? ????????Ministry of Women & Child Development???????? ???, ?? ??????Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110001. Dated: 27th January, 2021 To All Chief/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of all States/UTs.  Subject: Streamlining Guidelines on Quality Assurance, Roles and Responsibilities of Duty Holders, procedure for procurement, integrating AYUSH concepts and Data Management and Monitoring through ’Poshan Tracker’ for transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of Supplementary Nutrition - reg   Madam/Sir,             This Ministry had issued Streamlined Guidelines on the subject cited above, vide D.O. letter of even number dated 13.01.2021 (copy enclosed for ready reference).   2.         It is requested that the said Guidelines be shared with all District Magistrates/Collectors for strict adherence.  3.               Compliance in this regard may be reported to this Ministry immediately.  Encls. As above:(DR. HARMEET SINGH)                                                                                                             DIRECTOR (ICDS)
























HomeArchiveIndex to Select Questions (1984-1999)Ballot ListStatistical Statements Relating to QuestionsUploading of Questions - Status QueryProcedure for Sending Text of Questions & AnswersDemarcation of responsibilities in Govt. of IndiaBrochure on Statutory Corporations, Companies and Other Bodies in Which the Government of India have financial or controlling interestHighlights pertaining to questions of 17th Lok Sabha






Contact Us 
Disclaimer











        Developed and Hosted by National Informatics Centre (NIC)

Content on this website is published,
            managed & maintained by Software Unit, Computer (HW & SW) Management. Branch,
            Lok Sabha Secretariat





HomeMembersBusinessQuestionsDebatesPapers Laid


LegislationCommitteesSANSAD TVIntranetSecretariatPRIDE


RecruitmentSC/ST ReservationConferenceParliament Library


About ParliamentPhoto GalleryRelated LinksRTITendersFAQ


SpeakerDy. SpeakerLeader of the HousePanel of ChairpersonsContact UsFeedback


Council of MinistersPublications of MinistriesParliamentry ProceduresJournal of Parliamentary Information
Visitor's Counter:113265468







Copyright
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Terms &
                Conditions

                Accessibility Statement
Accessibility
                Options
Feedback
Site Map







