



	Questions : Lok Sabha




























Screen Reader Access
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Navigation



Text Size

                                A

                                A
A















हिन्दी मे








Parliament of India Lok Sabha House of the
                        People






* Special Characters not allowed












India Time 


Your Time 


                        Sunday,
                        10 April 2022









HomeMembersSitting MembersMembers Home PageMembers' PortalContact DetailsMembers SearchStatistical AnalysisAttendance of MembersHandbook Members Since 1952Digitized Who's WhoOthers BusinessProvisional CalendarList of BusinessPapers to be LaidList of Private Members' BusinessBulletin-IDigitized Lok Sabha Bulletin Part IBulletin-IIStatement of WorkSpecial Mentions (ZERO HOUR)Resume of WorkDigitized Resume of Work done by Lok Sabha QuestionsHomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions DebatesIntroductionSynopsisUncorrected DebateText of DebateDigitized DebatesConstituent Assembly DebatesWit And HumourDebate SearchHindi FontsDisclaimer Papers LaidPapers Laid on the Table of the House LegislationIntroduction(How Bill Becomes Act)Bills IntroducedBills PassedBills PendingBills AssentedBills LapsedBills WithdrawnBills NegativedBills Search Disclaimer CommitteesIntroductionChairpersonSummary of WorkCommittee Meetings ScheduleBills Referred to CommitteesReports PresentedDigitized ReportsPress ReleaseMembership SearchToday's Committee MeetingsCommittee Subject SelectedDepartment Related-RS Govt. AssurancesSANSAD TVIntranet





HomeQuestion ListStatus of notices of questionQuestions CalendarGrouping of Ministries - AlphabeticalOfficers in Min./Dept. Dealing with Parliamentary WorkQuestion SearchSupplementary Questions











Download as PDF




Print












PDF/WORD(Hindi)


PDF/WORD




                                    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
                                





                                    MINISTRY OF
                                    TRIBAL AFFAIRS






                                    LOK SABHA
                                





UNSTARRED 


                                    QUESTION NO:
                                

3571






                                    ANSWERED ON: 
                                

15.07.2019






Schemes for Tribal Areas




Ganesh Singh














                        Will the Minister of





TRIBAL AFFAIRS


                        be pleased to state:-















                                                    (a) the details of the schemes that have been implemented for all-round development of tribal areas;        (b) the details of ‘Learning to Earning’ facilities to the youth residing in the forest areas of Madhya Pradesh including district Satna;       (c) whether the Government proposes to set up ‘Health and Wellness Centres for children’ and if so, the details thereof; and       (d) whether there is any plan for value addition and marketing of forest produce under Van Dhan Kendras and if so, the details thereof along with the achievement made in this regard as on date?






ANSWER




                                                        (a) & (b) : Government has adopted a multi-pronged strategy for overall and holistic development of tribal people living across the country including Madhya Pradesh. These include support for health, skill development, education, sanitation, water supply, livelihood etc. Major part of infrastructure development and provision of basic amenities in tribal areas/regions in the country is carried out through various schemes/programmes of different Central Ministries and the State Governments concerned, while the Ministry of Tribal Affairs provides additive to these initiatives by way of plugging critical gaps. The brief details of the schemes/ programmes being implemented by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the welfare of Scheduled Tribes is given at Annexure.(c) : Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has intimated that “Public Health & Hospital” being a State subject, the primary responsibility of provision of medical facilities and setting up of Government Hospitals in the tribal areas is that of respective State Governments/UT Administrations. Under National Health Mission (NHM), support is being provided to States for strengthening their healthcare system including for upgradation of existing and setting up new Public Health infrastructure for providing health care services to the people including children based on requirements posed by the States/UTs in their Programme Implementation Plans.   As per the budget announcement 2017-18, 1.5 lakh Health Sub Centres and Primary Health Centres across the country are being transformed into Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) for provision of comprehensive primary care that includes preventive and health promotion at the community level with continuum of care approach.(d) : Van Dhan Vikas Karyakram is an initiative targeting livelihood generation for tribal population by harnessing the wealth of forest i.e., Van Dhan at value addition and marketing centers namely ‘Van Dhan Vikas Kendras. The programme aims to tap into the traditional knowledge and skill sets of tribal people by adding technology and Information Technology for upgradation of output at each stage and to convert the tribal wisdom into a remunerative economic activity. Ministry of Tribal Affairs has accorded in-principal approval for establishment of one “Van Dhan Vikas Kendra” on pilot basis in Bijapur District, Chhattisgarh at a total cost of Rs.25.00 lakh, out of which 75% cost will be met by the Centre and remaining 25% of the cost shall be the State’s share.  The kendra is envisaged to provide skill up gradation and capacity building training to 300 beneficiaries besides providing facilities for primary processing and value addition to the gathered Minor Forest Produce (MFP) items.*****AnnexureAnnexure referred in reply to part (a) & (b) of Lok Sabha Unstarred Quesiton No.3571 for 15-07-2019 by SHRI GANESH SINGH: regarding ‘Schemes for Tribal Areas’. BRIEF DETAILS OF SCHEMES / PROGRAMMES OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRSI. SPECIAL CENTRAL ASSISTANCE TO TRIBAL SUB SCHEME (SCA to TSS):The scheme of Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub-Scheme (SCA to TSS) which is 100% grant from Government of India. Grants are released to States, having ST population for development and welfare of tribal people. Funds are released to States based upon proposals received from the State Governments, and considered in the Project Appraisal Committee (PAC), to bridge the gaps in sectors like education, health, agriculture, skill development, employment-cum-income generation, etc. 100% grants are provided to States. Major part of infrastructure development in tribal dominated areas and provision of basic amenities to tribal people in the country is carried out through various schemes / programmes of concerned Central Ministries and the State Governments concerned, while the Ministry of Tribal Affairs provides additive to these initiatives by way of plugging gaps under SCA to TSS.II. GRANTS UNDER ARTICLE 275(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA:            The Ministry of Tribal Affairs administers one programme named “Grants under Article 275(1) of the Constitution of India” wherein funds are released to 27 States, having ST population. Under this programme, 100% funding is made by Government of India. Funding under this programme is aimed to enable the States to meet the cost of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State for the purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of Scheduled Areas therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State. Funds are released towards various sectors such as education, health, agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, fisheries, dairy and skill development/other income generating schemes. This intervention is aimed at augmenting tribal household economy and administrative structure/institutional framework. III. SCHEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF PARTICULARLY VULNERABLE TRIBAL GROUPS (PVTGS):-There are certain groups among Scheduled Tribes who have declining or stagnant population, low level of literacy, pre-agricultural level of technology and are economically backward. These groups are among the most vulnerable sections of our society as they are few in numbers, have not attained any signi?cant level of social and economic development and generally inhabit remote localities having poor infrastructure and administrative support. 75 such groups in 18 States and one UT, i.e. UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, have been identi?ed and categorized as Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs).2.	The scheme covers these 75 identi?ed PVTGs. The scheme is very ?exible and it enables every State to focus on any developmental activity for PVTGs, viz., housing, land distribution, land development, agricultural growth, cattle development, connectivity, installation of non-conventional sources of energy for lighting purpose, social security or any other innovative activity meant for the comprehensive socio-economic development of PVTGs.IV. SCHEME OF GRANT-IN-AID TO VOLUNTARY ORGANISATION WORKING FOR THE WELFRAE OF SCHEDULED TRIBES:   The Scheme was launched in 1953-54 and was last revised w.e.f. 1st April 2008.     The prime objective of the scheme is to enhance the reach of welfare schemes of Government and fill the gaps in service deficient tribal areas, in the sectors such as education, health, drinking water, agro-horticultural productivity, social security net etc. through the efforts of voluntary organizations, and to provide favourable environment for socio-economic upliftment and overall development of the Scheduled Tribes (STs).  Any other innovative activity having direct positive impact on the socio-economic development or livelihood generation of STs may also be considered through voluntary efforts.  The scheme is Central Sector Scheme.  The grants are provided to the non-governmental organizations on application, in a prescribed format, duly recommended by the multi-disciplinary State Level Committee of the concerned State Government/UT Administration. Funds are generally provided to the extent of 90% by the Government.  The voluntary organization is expected to bear the remaining 10% balance from its own resources.V. SCHEME OF STRENGTHENING EDUCATION AMONG ST GIRLS IN LOW LITERACY DISTRICTS:         The primary objective of this Central Sector Scheme is promotion of education among tribal girls in the identified low literacy districts of the country.  The scheme, revised w.e.f. 1st April 2008,   aims to improve the socio-economic status of the poor and illiterate tribal population through the education of women.  The Scheme has been revised with effect from 1.4.2008.  Now it is being implemented in 54 identified low literacy districts where ST Population is 25% or more and ST female literacy rate is below 35% as per 2001 census.  The Scheme aims to bridge the gap in literacy levels between the general female population and tribal women and is meant exclusively for ST Girls.  The educational complexes are established in rural areas of identified districts and have classes I to V with a provision for upgradation up to class XII, provided there is sufficient accommodation for classrooms, hostel, a kitchen, gardening and for sports facilities.  The educational complexes impart not only formal education to tribal girls but also train the students in agriculture, animal husbandry, other vocations and crafts to make them economically strong. VI. PRE-MATRIC SCHOLARSHIPS TO ST STUDENTS:•	Applicable to students who are studying in Classes IX – X.•	Parental income from all sources should be less than Rs.2.00 lakhs per annum, which is  proposed to be increased to Rs.2.5 lakhs.•	Scholarship of Rs.150/- per month for day scholars and Rs.350/- per month for hostellers is given for a period of 10 months in a year, Scholarships are paid @ Rs.150/- per month for Day Scholars and @ Rs.350/- per month for Hostellers, for a period of 10 months in a year. This is proposed to be revised  from existing Rs.150/- to Rs.225/- p.m. for Day Scholars, and from Rs.350/- to  Rs.525/- p.m. for Hostellers.•	Scholarship is disbursed through the State Government/UT Administration.•	Funds shared at the ratio of 75:25 between the Centre and State Governments/UT Administrations  and 90:10 for NE and Specially Category States (Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand) from 2014-15 onwards.VII.  POST MATRIC SCHOLARSHIPS TO ST STUDENTS:•	Applicable to students who are studying in any recognized course from a recognized institution for which qualification is Matriculation/Class X or above.•	Parental income from all sources should be less than Rs.2.50 lakhs per annum.•	Compulsory fees charged by educational institutions are reimbursed subject to the limit fixed by the concerned State Fee fixation committee and scholarship amount of Rs.230 to Rs.1200 per month, depending upon the course of study is paid.•	Scholarship is distributed through the State Government/UT Administration.•	Funds shared at the ratio of 75:25 between the Centre and State Governments/UT Administrations and 90:10 for NE and Specially Category States (Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand) from 2014-15 onwards. VIII. NATIONAL OVERSEAS SCHOLARSHIPS FOR ST CANDIDATES FOR    STUDYING ABROAD:•	The Scheme provides for financial assistance to selected students to pursue Post Graduation, Ph.D & Post-Doctoral study abroad.•	A total of 20 awards are given every year. Of these, 17 awards are for STs and 3 awards for students belonging to Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs).•	Parental/family income from all sources should not exceed Rs.6.00 lakhs per annum.•	Disbursement of scholarships through the Ministry of External Affairs/ Indian Missions abroad.IX. NATIONAL FELLOWSHIP & SCHOLARSHIP FOR HIGHER EDUCATION OF ST STUDENTS:(i)	SCHOLARSHIP FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (earlier known as Top Class Education for ST Students):•	Scholarship is given to ST students for pursuing studies in prescribed courses in any of the 246 institutions of excellence across the country like IITs, AIIMS, IIMs, NIITs, etc. identified by the Ministry.  •	Total number of scholarships is 1000 per year.•	Family income from all sources should not exceed Rs.6.00 lakhs per annum.•	Scholarship amount includes tuition fees, living expenses and allowances for books and computer.(ii)	FELLOWSHIP (earlier known as Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship Scheme for ST Students):•	750 fellowships are provided to ST students each year for pursing higher studies in India for M.Phil and Ph.D.•	Fellowship for M.Phil is provided @ Rs.25000/- per month and for Ph.D @ Rs.28000/- per month.o	Contingency for Fellows in Humanities and Social Science is provided @ Rs.10000/- per annum for two year and Rs. 20500/- per annum for the rest of the period.o	Contingency for Fellows in Science, Engineering Technology  is provided @ Rs.12000/- per annum for two years and @ 25000/- per annum for the rest of the period.o	Escorts/Reader assistance @ Rs.2000/- per month is provided in case of physically and visually handicapped candidates.o	HRA as per rules of University / Institution / Colleges.•	The maximum duration for which the scholarships are available  is given below:a.	M.Phil			-	2 years  b. Ph.D exclusively	-	5 years  c. M.Phil + Ph.D   	–  	2 years (M.Phil) and 3 years (Ph.D).X. INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT FOR DEVELOPMENT & MARKETING OF TRIBAL PRODUCTS / PRODUCE (CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEME):- 	Under the scheme, Grants-in-aid are released to State Tribal Development Cooperative Corporations (STDCCs) and Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India Ltd. (TRIFED) which is a multi-State Cooperative under Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The scope of the Scheme: -1)	To give comprehensive support for people belonging to various tribes in the entire range of production, product development, preservation of traditional heritage, support to both forest and agricultural produce of tribal people, support to Institutions to carry the above activities, provisions of better infrastructure, development of designs, dissemination of information about price and the agencies which are buying the products, support to Government agencies for sustainable marketing and thereby ensure a reasonable price regime.2) Sharing of information with Gram Panchayats and Gram Sabhas3) Skill upgradation, development of utilitarian products for increase in value in market.Objective of the Scheme:-The objective of the Scheme is to create institutions for the Scheduled Tribes to support marketing and development of activities they depend on for their livelihood.  These are sought to be achieved by specific measures like (i) market intervention; (ii) training and skill up-gradation of tribal Artisans, Craftsmen, MFP gatherers etc.; (iii) R&D/IPR activity; and (iv) Supply chain infrastructure development.XI.	‘MECHANISM FOR MARKETING OF MINOR FOREST PRODUCE (MFP) THROUGH MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE  (MSP) AND DEVELOPMENT OF VALUE CHAIN FOR MFP AS A MEASURE OF SOCIALSAFETY FOR MFP GATHERERS (CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME):-		  This Ministry has introduced from the year 2013-14, a centrally sponsored scheme of ‘Mechanism for marketing of Minor Forest Produce (MFP) through Minimum Support Price (MSP) and Development of Value Chain for MFP’ as a measure of social safety for MFP gatherers who are primarily member of Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers whose very livelihood depends on collection and selling of MFP.2 	The scheme seeks to establish a system to ensure fair monetary returns for their efforts in collection, primary processing, storage, packaging, transportation etc. It also seeks to get them a share of revenue from the sales proceeds with cost deducted. It also aims to address other issues for sustainability of process.3     The scheme envisages fixation and declaration of Minimum Support Price for the selected MFP. Procurement & Marketing operation at pre fixed MSP will be undertaken by the designated State Agencies. Simultaneously, other medium & long term issues like sustainable collection, value addition, infrastructure development, knowledge base expansion of MFP, market intelligence development, strengthening the bargaining power of Gram Sabha / Panchayat will also be addressed.XII. SUPPORT TO NATIONAL SCHEDULED TRIBES FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NSTFDC) / STATE SCHEDULED TRIBES FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATIONS (STFDCs):- NSTFDC a fully owned Public Sector Enterprise of Government of India, is provided with 100% equity share capital contribution by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  The authorized share capital of the Corporation is Rs 750.00 crore.  The paid up Share capital is Rs 570.00 crore (as on 15.03.2017).  The main objectives of NSTFDC are:-•	To identify economic activities of importance to the Scheduled Tribes so as to generate self-employment and raise their income level.•	To upgrade their skills and processes through both institutional and on the job training.•	To make existing State/ UT Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development Corporations (SCAs) and other developmental agencies engaged in economic development of the Scheduled Tribes more effective.•	To assist SCAs in project formulation, implementation of NSTFDC assisted schemes and in imparting training to their personnel.•	To monitor implementation of NSFDC assisted schemes in order to assess their impact.	The STFDCs are catering to STs in various States and are provided assistance in the form of contribution towards share capital by this Ministry.  The ratio of its contribution is in the share of 51:49 between State and Government and Central Government.  The main objectives of the scheme are :-•	Identification of eligible ST families and motivating them to undertake economic development schemes.•	Sponsoring those schemes to financial institutions for credit support.•	Providing financial assistance in form of margin money on low rate of interest; and •	Providing necessary linkage/ tie-up with other poverty alleviation programmes.XIII. THE SCHEME  ‘SUPPORT TO TRIBAL RESEARCH  INSTITUTE(TRI)’:This is a Central Sector Scheme with 100% funding by the Central Government to the TRIs directly or through State Government on need basis with the approval of APEX Committee of the Ministry. The continuation of the scheme has already been approved and revised guidelines issued (2017). Annual proposal is appraised and approved by APEX Committee usually in the 1st Quarter/ FY. Mid-term Review of the projects sanctioned to the State TRIs under the Scheme ‘Support to TRIs” is done in the month of September. Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs) have been set up by various State Governments. TRIs are established and administratively supported by concerned State Governments. The basic objective of the scheme is to strengthen the Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs) in their infrastructural needs, Research & Documentation activities and Training & Capacity Building programmes, etc. Focus of the scheme is to establish TRIs in each of the Tribal dominated States. It is envisaged that TRIs should work as body of knowledge & research more or less as a think tank for tribal development, preservation of tribal cultural heritage, providing inputs to States for evidence based planning and appropriate legislations, capacity building of tribals and persons / institutions associated with tribal affairs, dissemination of information and creation of awareness. To recognize the heroic deeds of tribals, Government has resolved to set up Tribal Freedom Fighters’ Museums in the States.XIV. THE SCHEME  ‘TRIBAL FESTIVAL, RESEARCH INFORMATION AND MASS EDUCATION)’:The basic objective of the scheme to identify and recognize institutes/organizations as Centre of Excellence (CoE) to undertaking various research studies/publication of books/documentation including audio visual documentaries to fill the gap of research studies on tribal issues and Promotion of rich tribal cultural heritage as well as capacity building of tribal persons/institutions associated with tribal affairs, dissemination of information and creation of awareness.Research Institutes and Organizations have been receiving financial support from the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for carrying out short-term research and extension work among tribal communities in the country. Ministry of Tribal Affairs have been funding to them on the basis of the proposals received in the first instance and studies approved.  The scheme aims at supporting and strengthening active research in Universities and reputed Institutions as well as Institutions with potential, including NGOs, Registered Professional Organizations and Autonomous Bodies working in the fields of tribal development and research. Renowned NGOs, Research Institutes and Organizations, where expertise exist and which have already made a mark by carrying out pioneering research in the field of study of tribal cultures and their development and extension work in particular subject areas.The Institutes/Organizations declared as Centre of Excellence will be provided 100% Grants-in-aid by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The installment will be released only after submission of draft report of the research study/documentation done by a particular institute/organization on the work approved by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. Ministry of Tribal Affairs shall have the right to review the draft report and any modification asked for by the Ministry will have to be carried out by the concerned Institute/Organization.  The duration of research studies/documentation work report will be within a period of 8- 12 months from the date of sanction of grants-in-aid under the Scheme of Centre of Excellence. The grant-in-aid is released under this scheme for various field like documentation of tribal cultures, which includes dance, music, songs, languages, dialects, tribal arts, traditional medicines and sports, customary laws and religions. Research on Tribal Minor Forest Produce (MFP) Rights, Women rights in the Vth Scheduled Areas and the VIth Scheduled Areas. Research studies on migration, displacement, resettlement and rehabilitation of minor and major project affected Tribal families/ tribal areas. Dissemination of various enactments/ regulations on money lending / debt redemption meant for STs.  Documentation of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) in respect of their population, customary laws and culture. Organization of awareness campaign amongst STs about basic minimum needs like primary health including pre-natal and post-natal health for women & children, drinking water and primary education; etc.  Publication of issues related to research and documentation of the Scheduled Tribes. Organization of seminars / workshop on matters related to tribal issues etc. Documentation of tribal artifacts.*****
























HomeArchiveIndex to Select Questions (1984-1999)Ballot ListStatistical Statements Relating to QuestionsUploading of Questions - Status QueryProcedure for Sending Text of Questions & AnswersDemarcation of responsibilities in Govt. of IndiaBrochure on Statutory Corporations, Companies and Other Bodies in Which the Government of India have financial or controlling interestHighlights pertaining to questions of 17th Lok Sabha






Contact Us 
Disclaimer











        Developed and Hosted by National Informatics Centre (NIC)

Content on this website is published,
            managed & maintained by Software Unit, Computer (HW & SW) Management. Branch,
            Lok Sabha Secretariat





HomeMembersBusinessQuestionsDebatesPapers Laid


LegislationCommitteesSANSAD TVIntranetSecretariatPRIDE


RecruitmentSC/ST ReservationConferenceParliament Library


About ParliamentPhoto GalleryRelated LinksRTITendersFAQ


SpeakerDy. SpeakerLeader of the HousePanel of ChairpersonsContact UsFeedback


Council of MinistersPublications of MinistriesParliamentry ProceduresJournal of Parliamentary Information
Visitor's Counter:113093970







Copyright
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Terms &
                Conditions

                Accessibility Statement
Accessibility
                Options
Feedback
Site Map







